IG-therasorb immunoapheresis in orthotopic xenotransplantation of baboons with landrace pig hearts. The major problem of xenotransplantation is, that hyperacute xenograft rejection (HXR) causes graft failure within minutes or a few hours because of natural antibodies and activation of the complement system. As a preclinical model we transplanted pig hearts orthotopically into baboons. To prevent HXR after orthotopic xenotransplantation (oXHTx), the immunoglobulins (Ig) and natural antibodies were adsorbed to reusable Ig-Therasorb immunoadsorption (IA) columns. We performed three oXHTx of landrace pig hearts into baboons (19+/-6.8 kg), using extracorporeal circulation (ECC) connected to the IA unit. After separating the recipient's blood into plasma and cellular fraction by a plasma filter, plasma flow was directed to the Ig-Therasorb column coated with polyclonal sheep-antibodies against human IgG, IgM, and IgA. Intraoperative treatment consisted of 4 cycles of IA. For a control, we transplanted one pig heart into a baboon (16.9 kg) without applying IA. Perioperatively, serum concentrations of Ig, anti-pig-antibodies, complement and cardiac enzymes were determined. Tissue samples of myocardium were collected at the end of the study for immunohistochemical examinations, light microscopic examination (LM) and electron microscopic examination (EM). For cardiac monitoring after oXHTx, we used ECG, echocardiography, and invasive measurement of cardiac output. To prevent a mismatch of donor and recipient heart size, the donor pig had a 30-40% lower body weight than the recipient baboon. Four cycles of IA removed >80% of IgG, IgM, and IgA from plasma. The graft of the control animal failed after 29 min. The first oXHTx with IA was intentionally terminated after 100 min, the second oXHTx after 11 hr and the third oXHTx after 21 hr. All xenografts showed no histological signs of HXR. After weaning off ECC, these donor hearts worked in sinus rhythm without electrocardiographic ST-segment elevation. An excellent cardiac output was measured by echocardiography and thermodilution (2 L/min). Serological parameters indicating cardiac damage were significantly lower after IA if compared with the control experiment. Macroscopically, the xenograft of the control animal showed massive hemorrhage in comparison with the almost inconspicuous grafts after IA. The myocardium of the IA group demonstrated fewer deposits of Ig and complement components compared with the control animal. Baboons do not hyperacutely reject a porcine xenograft after antibody depletion by the Ig-Therasorb column. In our experiment only 4 cycles of immunoapheresis effectively prevented HXR after oXHTx of baboons. The Ig-Therasorb column is a reusable device, which can be handled easily in combination with the ECC. IA must be tested in oXHTx longterm survival experiments, especially in combination with transgenic pig organs, which could be a reliable preclinical approach for future clinical xenotransplantation. 