The kinetics of tolerance induction by nondepleting anti-CD4 monoclonal antibody (RIB 5/2) plus intravenous donor alloantigen administration. CD4+ T cells play an essential role in allograft rejection. The monoclonal anti-rat CD4 antibody, RIB 5/2, has been shown to modulate the CD4 glycoprotein without eliminating the recipient T cells. We have successfully induced tolerance to rat heart allografts by recipient pretreatment with a single dose of RIB 5/2 plus intravenous administration of donor splenocytes. In this study, we explored whether this potent regimen could induce tolerance to the more resistant kidney and skin allografts. Furthermore, we examined the kinetics and requirements for tolerance to be met by a single dose of RIB 5/2 plus i.v. alloantigen. The efficacy of a single i.p. dose of 20 mg/kg RIB 5/2 plus i.v. donor antigen (25x10(6) splenocyte) pretreatment 0, 21, or 40 days before receipt of an MHC-mismatched Lewis (RT1l) to Buffalo (RT1b) rat cardiac, renal, or skin allograft was studied. Another group of Buffalo recipients treated with RIB 5/2 plus an i.v. alloantigen +/-thymectomy received kidney transplants after 40 days. Attempts to prevent tolerance used interleukin-2 or prior sensitization. Mixed lymphocyte cultures, cytotoxic assays, and precursor frequencies of helper and cytotoxic cells, by limiting dilution analysis, serially measured in vitro cell-mediated immunity. RIB 5/2 administration combined with i.v. alloantigen 21 days before induced tolerance to heart and kidney allografts but did not prolong skin graft survival. In contrast, kidney allografts delayed for 40 days after pretreatment were acutely rejected and survival was not affected by the thymectomy. MLC, CTL, and pTH, and pCTL precursor frequencies from recipients of long-term grafts were specifically suppressed to donor, but not third party, alloantigen. A single dose of the nondepleting anti-CD4 monoclonal antibody, RIB 5/2, plus i.v. alloantigen is a potent inducer of tolerance to heart and kidney, but not skin, allografts. The RIB 5/2-induced donor unresponsiveness to a delayed kidney or cardiac allograft is time dependent but can be prolonged if specific alloantigen is present. Suppression of cell-mediated allo-immune responsiveness correlates with allograft acceptance. 