Inhaled nitric oxide reduces pulmonary vascular resistance more than prostaglandin E(1) during heart transplantation. Heart transplantation in patients with increased pulmonary vascular resistance is often associated with postbypass right heart failure. We therefore compared the abilities of prostaglandin E(1) (PGE(1)) and inhaled nitric oxide to reduce pulmonary vascular resistance during heart transplantation. Patients undergoing orthotopic heart transplantation for congestive heart failure were randomly assigned to either a PGE(1) infusion at a rate of 8 ng. kg. (-1)min(-1) starting 10 min before weaning from cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) (n = 34) or inhalation of 4 ppm nitric oxide starting just before weaning from CPB (n = 34). Both treatments were increased stepwise, if necessary, and were stopped 6 h postoperatively. Hemodynamic values were recorded after the induction of anesthesia, 10 and 30 min after weaning from CPB, and 1 h and 6 h postoperatively. Immediately after weaning from CPB, pulmonary vascular resistance was nearly halved in the nitric oxide group but reduced by only 10% in the PGE(1) group. Pulmonary artery pressure was decreased approximately 30% during nitric oxide inhalation, but only approximately 16% during the PGE(1) infusion. Six hours after surgery, pulmonary vascular resistance and pulmonary artery pressure were similar in the two groups. The ratio between pulmonary vascular resistance and systemic vascular resistance was significantly less in the nitric oxide patients at all postbypass times. In contrast, the pulmonary-to-systemic vascular resistance ratio increased approximately 30% in the patients given PGE(1). Cardiac output, heart rate, mean arterial pressure, right atrial pressure, and pulmonary wedge pressure did not differ between the groups. Weaning from CPB was successful in all patients assigned to nitric oxide inhalation; in contrast, weaning failed in six patients assigned to PGE(1) (P = 0.03). Nitric oxide inhalation selectively reduces pulmonary vascular resistance and pulmonary artery pressure immediately after heart transplantation which facilitates weaning from cardiopulmonary bypass. 