Implantable left ventricular assist devices can successfully bridge adolescent patients to transplant. Left ventricular assist devices (LVAD) have been used successfully as a life-sustaining bridge to transplantation in adults with end-stage heart failure. Long-term implantable cardiac assist devices for smaller adolescent patients are not yet available in the United States. This study reviews the experience with patients less than 21 years old that received HeartMate LVADs (TCI) at our institution. Twelve patients were implanted with 13 LVADs. The patients ranged in age from 11 to 20 years (mean 16 years). Body surface area ranged from 1.4 to 2.2 m2 (mean 1.8 m2). Patients were selected for LVAD placement based on eligibility for heart transplant and evidence of end-organ dysfunction. Device placement in small patients was facilitated with prosthetic graft abdominal wall closure. No patient received systemic anticoagulation. The duration of LVAD support ranged from 0 to 397 days (mean 123 days). Seven of the 8 patients eligible for discharge from the hospital with a vented-electric LVAD were supported at home while awaiting transplantation. Outcomes of LVAD support were: LVAD explantation in 2 cases (15%), expiration with LVAD in place in 3 cases (23%), and successful transplantation in 8 cases (62%). Complications included 4 patients with systemic infection, 3 re-operations for hemorrhage, 1 embolic event, and 1 intraoperative air embolus that proved fatal. One explanted patient required a subsequent LVAD and the other expired 4 months after explantation. Six of the 8 transplanted patients are alive and well with follow-up ranging from 8 to 43 months. Adolescent patients with heart failure can be successfully supported on a long-term basis to heart transplantation with the HeartMate LVAD. The wearable device allows for discharge home while awaiting transplantation. Device explantation without subsequent transplantation can be unpredictable. The incidence of thromboembolism remains low despite the absence of systemic anticoagulation. The technique of prosthetic graft closure of the abdominal wall facilitates the use of this device in smaller patients. 