Risk of lymphoid neoplasia after cardiothoracic transplantation. a cohort study of the relation to Epstein-Barr virus. Organ transplantation is associated with a greatly increased risk of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-associated lymphoproliferative disease (LPD), which is often fatal. There has been little epidemiological analysis, however, of the risk factors for LPD in transplant patients and none on whether the risks of non-EBV-associated lymphoid neoplasms are also increased. The risk of lymphoid neoplasia was assessed in a cohort of 1563 patients who underwent cardiothoracic transplantation at Harefield Hospital, UK from 1980 to 1994 and were followed until December 1995. EBV antibody was assessed in the patients before transplantation, and lymphoid neoplasms were assessed for EBV RNA and latent EBV gene expression. Thirty cases of LPD occurred during follow-up. One lymphoma of unknown EBV status occurred. There were also six cases of EBV-negative non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (EBV-negative NHL), a highly significant excess over expectations from the general population rates of NHL (standardized incidence ratio 10.2 [95% confidence interval, 4.6-22.8]). The risk of LPD was significantly 10-fold raised in individuals who were EBV seronegative before transplantation; independently of this, it decreased steeply with age at transplantation and was greatest in the first year after transplantation. The risk was significantly raised in young seronegative recipients if the donor was older than the recipient. EBV-negative NHL occurred entirely in men 45 years old and older who were EBV seropositive before transplantation, and risk was not related to duration since transplantation. The risk factors found for LPD accord with EBV etiology and with greater hazard from primary infection than from reactivation. A second non-Hodgkin's lymphoid neoplasm, not related to EBV, seems also to be a consequence of transplantation and immunosuppression but is unlikely to be due to first infection by a ubiquitous agent. Its etiology and prevention need investigation separately from LPD. 