The bad ventricle--revascularization versus transplantation. The proportion of patients with left-ventricular dysfunction (LVD) undergoing high risk revascularization is increasing. In this patient group, the perioperative risk is elevated because of the pre-existing pathophysiology. Detailed evaluation and interdisciplinary differential therapeutic considerations on the basis of the comparative benefit rationale, with cardiac transplantation alternative, is mandatory. Among 7275 patients who underwent coronary artery bypass grafting between 1990 and 1998 in our institution, we found 51 patients who had had an ejection fraction <20%, and thus were candidates for transplantation (group CABG); these were compared with 163 patients who were listed for cardiac transplantation because of ischemic cardiomyopathy (group HTX). The survival analysis was performed on the basis of the intention-to-treat principle independent of subsequent transplantation. Both groups were comparable with regard to left-ventricular ejection fraction; pulmonary capillary wedge pressure and serum creatinine, but patients in the CAGB group were older (63+/-11 vs 56+/-8; p = 0.001) and included a higher percentage of women (m/f: 42/9 vs 152/11; p = 0.03). Nevertheless, there was a similar 1-year survival in both groups (group BP 71.9% vs group HTX 66.3%; p = ns). Looking at the CABG group, the internal thoracic artery was used in 36/51 patients, an intra-aortic balloon pump was used preoperatively in 26 patients, and intraoperatively in 6. Left-ventricular assist devices had to be inserted in three patients, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation once. Perioperative (30 day) survival was 88.2 %. An elevated preoperative serum creatinine and the nonusage of the internal thoracic artery predicted an adverse outcome. In the long-term course, the NYHA functional class improved in most cases from III preoperatively to I after 26 (2-66) months. We conclude that patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy, viable myocardium, and graftable vessels can be revascularized with acceptable risk. Since for these patients a standby of mechanical circulatory support must be anticipated perioperatively, this infrastructure should be established within the center. 