Immunomodulatory effects of pretransplant donor blood transfusion on T-cell-independent xenoreactive immunity. Pretransplant blood transfusions have beneficial effects on both clinical and experimental allograft survival. In the present study, we examined whether pretransplant hamster blood transfusions (pHBT) alone or together with peritransfusion immunosuppressive strategies designed to target B cells and/or natural killer (NK) cells, could modulate T cell-independent (T-I) xenoreactivity in athymic nude rats. Hamster or mouse hearts were heterotopically xenotransplanted into untreated or treated athymic nude rats receiving either pHBT, anti-B cell or anti-NK cell therapy alone or their combinations. Xenoreactive antibodies (xAbs) and the percentage of NK cells were analyzed by FACScan analysis. NK cytotoxicity was measured by a standard 4 hr 51Cr release assay. Xenografts (Xgs) were examined by hematoxylin-eosin (H&E), by light microscopic method with Masson's trichrome and orcein staining, by immunofluorescent staining for immunoglobulin M and C3 deposition, and by immunohistochemical staining for infiltration of NK cells and macrophages (Mphis). In 1 of 6 rats given pHBT alone 2 weeks before receiving hamster xenografts, Xg survival was prolonged to 55 days compared with 3.0+/-1.2 days in the other 5 animals and with 3.0+/-0.6 days in untreated animals. In the 55 days, surviving Xg infiltration of Mphis and NK cells was seen together with severe signs of chronic rejection, such as fibrosis and obliterative vasculopathy. The addition of the anti-B cell immunosuppressant MNA715 (malononitriloamide x920715, 20 mg/kg/day) from day -14 to day +14 or of 100 microL of rabbit anti-asialo GM1 serum ([anti-ASGM1] an NK cell depleting antibody) on day -14 resulted in a significant and species-specific prolongation of the survival of hamster Xgs, respectively 59.8+/-9.6 days and 58.2+/-14.7 days (P<0.001 vs. control group), but not of mouse heart Xgs that were rejected in a normal tempo. All prolonged hamster Xgs were infiltrated with Mphis and NK cells and developed severe lesions of chronic rejection, such as fibrosis and obliterative vasculopathy. In contrast, MNA715 or anti-ASGM1 alone had no effect on Xg survival (4.8+/-1.7 days and 2.7+/-0.6 days, respectively). Combined MNA715/anti-ASGM1 treatment only moderately promoted Xg survival (10+/-5.0 days; P<0.001). A simultaneous administration of pHBT, MNA715, and anti-ASGM1 induced indefinite and species-specific Xg survival in all recipients. In vivo and in vitro studies demonstrated that both T-I B cell and NK cell species-specific xenotolerance were achieved. Pretransplant blood transfusion may have a species-specific immunomodulatory effect on T-I xenoreactivity. This effect is further enhanced by a temporary co-administration of MNA715 or by a single injection of anti-ASGM1. A combination of pHBT, MNA715, and anti-ASGM1 induces species-specific T-I xenotolerance. 