Simvastatin attenuates vascular hypercoagulability in cardiac transplant recipients. 3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors have been shown to reduce cardiac allograft failure and to lower the incidence of transplant coronary artery disease. These effects result from as yet unknown mechanisms not clearly attributable to lipid lowering. We here report that low-dose simvastatin treatment inhibits excessive expression of monocyte tissue factor (TF) and reduces the persistent hypercoagulability state seen in cardiac transplant recipients. Fifteen consecutive heart transplant recipients receiving standard oral immunosuppression were newly assigned to a 10 mg daily simvastatin therapy. Levels of TF activity in both unstimulated and lipopolysaccharide-stimulated peripheral blood mononuclear cells drawn from transplant recipients before and under simvastatin therapy were evaluated by one-stage clotting assay. Monocyte TF activity was found to be significantly increased in cardiac transplant recipients when compared with healthy controls. Excessive monocyte procoagulant activity was reduced in cardiac transplant recipients during simvastatin treatment. This effect occurred independently of the reduction of serum low-density lipoprotein cholesterol. As demonstrated by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, monocyte TF reduction by simvastatin, observed in 13 of the 15 transplant recipients investigated, could be ascribed to an inhibition of monocyte TF gene transcription. The reduction of monocyte TF activity during treatment with simvastatin paralleled with the normalization of elevated levels of thrombin-antithrombin complex, prothrombin fragment F1+2, and D-dimer, which are markers of thrombin and fibrin formation indicating coagulation activation after cardiac transplantation. Inhibition of monocyte TF expression and attenuation of the persistent hypercoagulable state observed in cardiac transplant recipients during treatment with simvastatin may represent an important mechanism by which HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors protect against the development of transplant coronary artery disease. 