Microchimerism, donor dendritic cells, and alloimmune reactivity in recipients of Flt3 ligand-mobilized hemopoietic cells: modulation by tacrolimus. Flt3 ligand (FL) is a potent hemopoietic growth factor that strikingly enhances stem cells and dendritic cells (DC) in vivo. We examined the impact of infusing FL-mobilized bone marrow (BM) cells on microchimerism and anti-donor reactivity in normal and tacrolimus-immunosuppressed, noncytoablated allogeneic recipients. BM from B10 (H2b) mice given FL (10 microg/day; days 0-8; FL-BM) contained a 7-fold higher incidence of potentially tolerogenic immature CD11c+ DC (CD40low, CD80low, CD86low, MHC IIlow) that induced alloantigen-specific T cell hyporesponsiveness in vitro. C3H (H2k) mice received 50 x 106 normal or FL-BM cells (day 0) and tacrolimus (2 mg/kg/day; days 0-12). On day 15, enhanced numbers of donor (IAb+) cells were detected in the thymi and spleens of FL-BM recipients. Tacrolimus markedly enhanced microchimerism, which declined as a function of time. Ex vivo splenocyte proliferative and CTL responses and Th1 cytokine (IFN-gamma) production in response to donor alloantigens were augmented by FL-BM infusion, but reduced by tacrolimus. Systemic infusion of purified FL-BM immature DC, equivalent in number to that in corresponding whole BM, confirmed their capacity to sensitize, rather than tolerize, recipient T cells in vivo. In vitro, tacrolimus suppressed GM-CSF-stimulated growth of myeloid DC from normal BM much more effectively than from FL-BM without affecting MHC class II or costimulatory molecule expression. Infusion of normal B10 BM cells at the time of transplant prolonged C3H heart allograft survival, whereas FL-BM cells did not. A therapeutic effect of tacrolimus on graft survival was observed in combination with normal, but not FL-BM cells. These findings suggest the need for alternative immunosuppressive strategies to calcineurin inhibition to enable the engraftment, survival, and immunomodulatory function of FL-enhanced, immature donor DC. 