Coronary revascularization in heart transplant recipients by excimer laser angioplasty. Aggressive development of allograft coronary artery disease is a major cause of death in heart transplant recipients. Percutaneous balloon angioplasty is considered suboptimal for complex lesions in native coronary vessels and heart transplant recipients, alike. Excimer laser energy (308-nm wavelength) can successfully remove and vaporize atherosclerotic plaques in native coronary vessels; however, its application in heart transplant recipients has not been studied clinically yet. Six heart transplant recipients underwent percutaneous excimer laser (CVX-300, Spectranetics, Colorado Springs, CO) coronary angioplasty for treatment of a total of 10 discrete, obstructive coronary artery lesions. By using concentric or eccentric multifiber laser catheters, energy parameters were set at a fluence of 45 mJ/mm(2) or 60 mJ/mm(2) with a frequency of 25 Hz and 40 Hz, respectively, with a pulse duration of 135 ns and output of 200 mJ/pulse. The "saline flush" and "pulse and retreat" lasing techniques were used. In each case, adjunct balloon angioplasty was performed; in five lesions, an intracoronary stent was implanted. Angiographic evaluation was performed by visual assessment. Each procedure was successful as defined by laser recanalization of the target lesion (reduction of target lesion stenosis in more than 20%) and subsequent adequate final luminal patency (reduction of target lesion stenosis to less than 50%) and absence of any major in-cardiac catheterization complication (such as perforation, acute closure, dissection, emergency coronary artery bypass surgery), or in-hospital complications (such as death, myocardial infarction, cardiac enzyme elevation, major bleeding), or need for surgical revascularization. A 92 +/- 5% preprocedural percent diameter stenosis was reduced by laser to 35 +/- 16% and by adjunct balloon angioplasty in all lesions and stenting in five lesions, to final residual stenosis of 2 +/- 6%. Angiographic follow-up between 2 and 6 months after the procedure demonstrated a target lesion restenosis rate of 22%. Percutaneous excimer laser is safe and efficacious in the treatment of focal obstructive lesions caused by allograft coronary artery disease. These data represent an early clinical experience; thus, the long-term outcome of this revascularization method in recipients of heart transplantation will have to be determined by a large scale prospective, randomized, multicenter clinical study. 