[Primary and isolated cutaneous lymphomatoid granulomatosis following heart-lung transplantation]. Lymphomatoid granulomatosis is an Epstein-Barr virus-associated B-cell lymphoproliferative disease. It is angiocentric and angiodestructive and involves the lungs, central nervous system and skin. Exclusive cutaneous involvement is rare and may be associated with a better outcome. Contrarily to the extra-cutaneous forms of lymphomatoid granulomatosis, it is difficult or impossible to detect Epstein-Barr virus DNA sequences in primary and isolated cutaneous lymphomatoid granulomatosis. A 54-year-old woman developed erythemato-violaceous lesions on both legs 3 years after a heart-lung transplantation. The diagnosis of erythema multiforme and of drug-induced vasculitis were first made. Because of fever and of the rapid extension of the lesions, the patient was hospitalized. The histologic examination of the first lesions showed a perivascular infiltrate, without epidermotropism, composed of histiocytes, lymphocytes and plasma cells. Immunohistochemistry revealed the presence of a predominantly T-cell infiltrate with some large B cells. Subsequent biopsies were diagnosed as high grade B-cell lymphoma. Polymerase chain reaction analysis as well as in situ hybridation study showed the presence of Epstein-Barr virus load in the lesions. There was however no serologic evidence of viral reactivation. Extensive systemic evaluation revealed no visceral or bone marrow involvement. Despite antiviral treatment and CHOP polychemotherapy, the patient died 3 months after her admission. This observation of lymphomatoid granulomatosis is particular because of its exclusive cutaneous involvement associated with a fulminant evolution to high grade B lymphoma. The presence of a context of iatrogenic immunosuppression underlies the role of altered immune cellular functions in the initiation and/or progression of lymphomatoid granulomatosis and strengthens the role of a viral agent in its pathogenesis. We suggest that the presence of Epstein-Barr virus, which is generally not associated with the isolated cutaneous forms of lymphomatoid granulomatosis, may have played a role in this fulminant evolution to high grade B lymphoma. 