The role of percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty in heart transplant recipients. Review the acute and late results of percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) in heart transplant recipients and examine the factors predictive of restenosis. Coronary graft disease (CGD) is the main factor responsible for late graft loss. Medical treatment, surgical revascularization, or retransplantation gives only suboptimal results in this regard. Therefore, PTCA has been attempted in this situation. More than 332 heart transplantations in our institution have been performed since 1992, the date of the first PTCA in our patients. We are currently in charge of 450 patients. All the characteristics, procedure-related information, and clinical outcome of patients needing PTCA were assessed by review of each patient's clinical records. All coronary angiograms were reviewed by an independent cardiologist. Since 1992, 53 coronary sites have been dilated in the course of 39 procedures in 29 patients. Indication for PTCA was asymptomatic angiographic coronary graft disease in 35 sites (64.8%), angina in 9 (16.6%), silent ischemia in 2 (3.7%), acute myocardial infarction in 1 (1.8%), and CHF in 7 (12.9%). Primary success (< 50% residual stenosis) was obtained in 50 (94.3%) of 53 lesions. No periprocedural death occurred. Procedural complications were 1 transient acute renal failure and 1 persistent bleeding at the puncture site. Six months restenosis rate (defined as percent stenosis > 50%) was 32.5% (14/43). Mean follow-up was 1.27 year +/- 1.2 (SD). Five deaths (17. 2%) occurred in follow-up and were all in relation to coronary graft disease. Mean time separating PTCA from death was 0.9 year +/- 1.3 (SD). We also sought to look at factors predictive of restenosis. By multivariate analysis, a positive recipient's serology for cytomegalovirus (CMV) before the graft was the only factor found protective against restenosis (odds ratio 22.4; confidence interval 1.1 to 443.4). PTCA in heart transplant recipients allows a high level of primary success with a low periprocedural-complication rate. Restenosis rate seems equivalent to restenosis rate in native coronary arteries. Mortality during follow-up is increased in this population and is the consequence of a high level of coronary events. Recipient positivity for CMV before the graft is associated with a protective effect from restenosis. 