Intrathymic immunomodulation in sensitized rat recipients of cardiac allografts: requirements for allorecognition pathways. Intrathymic injection of alloantigen in the form of donor cells, soluble major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules, or MHC allopeptides induces donor-specific tolerance in a variety of acute allograft rejection models. We have previously shown that a single intrathymic injection of donor spleen cells into pre-sensitized rats abrogates accelerated (circa 24-hour) rejection and prolongs the survival of cardiac allografts to about 7 days. The present study was designed to investigate the mechanisms by which intrathymic administration of donor cells modifies the course of accelerated rejection. Lewis RT1(1) (LEW) rats sensitized by transplantation with Wistar-Furth RT1(u) (WF) skin grafts received WF cardiac allografts 7 days later-a classic model of accelerated rejection. At the time of skin challenge, however, certain animals received intrathymic cell suspensions (either allogeneic or syngeneic) or donor-derived class I and/or class II MHC peptides. Control animals (sensitized by skin grafts but receiving no other treatment) rejected cardiac allografts within 24 hours. Intrathymic injection of WF splenocytes at the time of skin transplantation abrogated rejection at 24 hours and prolonged cardiac allograft survival to 6.6+/-0.6 days (p<0.001), whereas intrathymic administration of syngeneic (LEW) or allogeneic third party Brown Norway RT1(n) cells was ineffective in this regard. Intrathymic injection of gamma-irradiated donor cells marginally extended cardiac allograft survival to 3.0+/-0.9 days (p< 0.001), but the grafts were still rejected in an accelerated fashion. Intrathymic injection of donor-derived class I and/or class II MHC allopeptides at the same time period also failed to prolong cardiac allograft survival beyond 3 days. In the group receiving unmodified donor cells, elevated immunoglobulin M (IgM) and immunoglobulin G (IgG) allo-antibodies were found at the time of cardiac transplantation; this pattern was not observed with any other treatment. The superiority of non-modified donor spleen cells over gamma-irradiated donor cells or donor specific allopeptides in modifying the course of accelerated cardiac rejection suggests that direct allorecognition is the dominant pathway initiating rejection in sensitized transplant recipients. Marked alterations in the antidonor IgM and IgG responses are associated with successful abrogation of accelerated rejection by thymic immunomodulatory mechanisms. 