Early and late chemokine production correlates with cellular recruitment in cardiac allograft vasculopathy. Cardiac allograft vasculopathy (CAV) remains the leading cause of late mortality in heart transplant recipients. Activated T lymphocytes and macrophages infiltrate the donor heart before vascular intimal thickening develops, but the specific mediators of mononuclear cell recruitment leading to CAV are unknown. Therefore, we sought to define the relationship between chemokine gene expression and production, T lymphocyte and macrophage recruitment, and intimal thickening in a murine model of CAV. B10.A or B10.BR strain hearts were transplanted heterotopically into B10.BR mice. Recipients were killed at 1, 4, 7, 14, and 30 days. Donor hearts were assayed for chemokine gene expression with ribonuclease protection and for protein with ELISA. Intragraft cellular infiltration was defined immunohistochemically. Intimal thickening was quantitated morphometrically. Early and late patterns of intragraft chemokine expression associated with distinct cellular infiltration were identified. First, transient MIP-2 and MCP-1/JE production in isografts and allografts correlated with neutrophil and macrophage infiltration. MCP-1/JE production and macrophage infiltration was greater in allografts than isografts. Second, allografts demonstrated sustained lymphotactin, RANTES, and IP-10 expression, beginning at day 4, correlating with persistent macrophage and T lymphocyte infiltration. Intimal thickening became evident at 14 days. Isografts did not display the late pattern of sustained chemokine gene expression, cellular infiltration, or intimal thickening. Transient, early MIP-2, and MCP-1/JE production in isografts and allografts correlated with neutrophil and macrophage recruitment, and is likely related to ischemia-reperfusion. In allografts, the delayed induction of chemokines specific for macrophages and T lymphocytes correlated with mononuclear cell infiltration and preceded intimal thickening. This study thus demonstrates a dual pattern of chemokine induction correlating with intragraft mononuclear cell recruitment, associated with ischemia-reperfusion and CAV development. Chemokine-directed interventions may interfere with leukocyte trafficking and inhibit CAV development. 