Safety of intracoronary Doppler flow measurement. With the introduction of Doppler-tipped guide wires, intracoronary Doppler flow measurement has been increasingly accepted as an additional diagnostic approach in the catheterization laboratory. However, the safety of intracoronary Doppler flow measurement has not been well-investigated. The purpose of our study was to evaluate the safety of intracoronary Doppler flow measurement using the Doppler FloWire (Cardiometrics, Mountain View, Calif). A total of 906 patients were examined by intracoronary Doppler with a 0.014-inch or an 0.018-inch Doppler FloWire. For coronary flow reserve measurement, intracoronary injection of adenosine or papaverine was used. Of the patients studied, 77 were cardiac transplant recipients and 829 were patients who had not received a transplant, of whom 617 had undergone diagnostic coronary procedures and 212 had coronary interventions. In 27 (2.98%) of 906 patients adverse cardiac events were observed. Fifteen (1.66%) of 906 patients had severe transient bradycardia develop (asystole or second- to third-degree atrioventricular block) after intracoronary administration of adenosine, 14 of which occurred in the right coronary artery and 1 in the left anterior descending artery. Nine (0.99%) of 906 patients had coronary spasm during the passage of the Doppler wire (5 in the right coronary artery, 4 in the left anterior descending artery). Two (0.22%) of 906 patients had ventricular fibrillation during the procedure. Hypotension with bradycardia and ventricular extrasystole each occurred in 1 (0.11%) of 906 patients. The incidence of complication was significantly higher in transplant recipients than in patients who underwent either diagnostic or interventional procedures (12.99% vs 2.43% vs 0.94%, P <.001). The Doppler measurements in the right coronary artery were associated with a higher incidence of complications, especially bradycardia, compared with the left anterior descending and the left circumflex arteries (right coronary, 5.87% vs left anterior descending, 1.05% vs left circumflex, 0.17%; P <.001). All complications were cured medically. Intracoronary Doppler flow measurement with Doppler wires and intracoronary administration of adenosine is a safe method. However, severe complications such as bradycardia and coronary spasm can occur. Attention should be paid to the examination of the right coronary artery, especially in heart transplant recipients. 