Concordant xenotransplantation--non-vascularized pancreatic islets are more difficult to regraft than the vascularized heart. We have previously demonstrated that it is possible to perform retransplantation of a xenogeneic heart (mouse-to-rat) using cyclosporine A as monotherapy, provided that the first heart is transplanted under a short course of deoxyspergualin (DSG). If DSG is omitted, the first heart is rejected within four days and the second heart succumbs to hyperacute rejection within minutes. A mouse heart as first graft does not protect a consecutive pancreatic islet graft, although the heart continues to function after rejection of the cellular graft. One explanation for this discrepancy may be the fact that cellular grafts, as pancreatic islets, lack an endothelial lining. We have, therefore, further investigated possible differences between vascularized and non-vascularized xenografts regarding their capacity to induce unresponsiveness. The use of pancreatic islets as primary graft neither accelerated nor decelerated the speed of rejection of the vascularized heart used as secondary graft. Furthermore, hemagglutinating and cytotoxic antibody titres responded in the same manner as in naive rats transplanted with a mouse heart. Retransplantation with pancreatic islets also resulted in complete rejection of both the primary and secondary grafts. Thus, the lack of unresponsiveness cannot simply be explained by differences, between the pancreatic and cardiac tissues, in antigen expression. In addition, intraperitoneal transplantation of mouse heart cells as primary graft resulted in rejection of a secondary cardiac graft after three days. However, it cannot be totally excluded that the time of antigen exposure had an impact on these results. In conclusion, our previous and present studies suggest that the presence of an intact vascular bed, both in the first and second graft, is necessary to create a state of unresponsiveness. Because the pancreatic islets lack an endothelial lining, they do not benefit from an unresponsiveness of the immune system. Neither are they able to induce such an unresponsiveness. 