Complete transposition of the great arteries: surgical concepts for patients with systemic right ventricular failure following intraatrial repair. One of the most serious late complications of the intraatrial baffle procedure (Mustard or Senning correction) in patients suffering from transposition of the great arteries, (TGA) is the late systemic right ventricular failure. Nearly all patients presenting with right ventricular dysfunction have severe associated tricuspid regurgitation. The surgical options for these patients include tricuspid valve reconstruction or replacement, staged conversion to the arterial switch operation and orthotopic heart transplantation. Review of 189 operative survivors who underwent the Mustard or Senning operation for TGA between 1970 and 1993 in our institution revealed 12 patients (6.3%) who died from severe systemic right ventricular dysfunction (mean follow-up 16+/-3.5 years), which was the most common cause of late death. All of them had concomitant severe tricuspid regurgitation. 7 patients (3.7%) died from sudden cardiac death. The actuarial survival at 10 years is 93% for simple TGA and 85% for TGA associated with ventricular septum defect or coarctation. At our institution, 4 adolescent or adult patients underwent tricuspid valve surgery; tricuspid valve replacement was performed in 2 patients and valve repair in 2 patients. In the mid-term follow-up, 2 of these patients died. Two additional patients underwent orthotopic heart transplantation, and one died on the waiting list. Staged conversion from the Senning/Mustard atrial repair to the arterial switch operation was initially reported by Mee. The procedure for pulmonary artery banding starts with inducing left ventricular reconditioning with subsequent arterial switch. The mortality of this two-staged procedure was as high as 20% to 30% in our early experience, and some of the candidates underwent heart transplantation. Tricuspid valve repair or replacement do not improve right ventricular function in patients with a failing right ventricle following the Mustard/Senning operation. Staged conversion to arterial switch may improve right ventricular function by decreasing the work load of the right ventricle and provides anatomic repair with left ventricle-to-aorta continuity. Orthotopic heart transplantation is the only alternative if the left ventricle does not respond to pulmonary artery banding. 