Growth and pubertal development following pediatric heart transplantation: a 15-year experience at Ste-Justine Hospital. Thirty-one children and adolescents have undergone allograft heart transplantation at Ste-Justine Hospital from July 1984 to August 1996. Twenty-five patients were followed prospectively more than 3 years to document their growth and pubertal development. Parameters surveyed were clinical (height, weight, pubertal staging, and bone age) and biochemical (luteinizing hormone (LH), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), testosterone, estradiol, dehydroepiandrosterone sulphate (DHEAS), IGF-1, and fasting insulin). At surgery, there were 18 boys and 7 girls aged 11 months to 17 years (median 13 years); 14 had congenital heart defects (CHDs) and 11 had a cardiomyopathy (CM). Immunosuppressive therapy included cyclosporine, azathioprine, and prednisone. Eighteen patients were still growing (15 boys, 3 girls): 8 had a retarded bone age and 6 with CHD had severe growth failure. Following surgery, most patients maintained their height within one sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) score of that initially observed. Patients reaching their target heights do so mainly in the lower range. Three patients not reaching target height had a CHD. Weight was greatest 1 year postoperatively (113 +/- 27% ideal body weight) with normalization at 2 years (100 +/- 18%). Of the 13 prepubertal patients, menarche occurred at age 12 in 1 girl, while 3 boys began puberty at age 12 years. In both sexes, serum levels of gonadotropins and IGF-1 increased during puberty, moderate hyperinsulinism was observed, and DHEAS levels decreased. Our results indicate that children and adolescents grow normally following cardiac transplantation and that they attain their target height despite a lack of catch-up growth. They gain weight significantly in the first postoperative year with normalization of their weight at 2 years. Furthermore, the clinical and biochemical indices of puberty are overall within the norms. However, the severity of growth delay at the time of transplantation inherent to the cardiac pathology has a major impact on adult height. 