The pig analogue of CD59 protects transgenic mouse hearts from injury by human complement. It has been proposed that hyperacute rejection (HAR) of pig-to-primate vascularized xenografts is due in large part to ineffective regulation of recipient complement by pig complement regulatory proteins (CRPs), and indeed transgenic expression of human CRPs in pigs can prevent hyperacute rejection. However, at least one pig CRP (CD59) efficiently regulates human complement in vitro, suggesting that it is the level of expression of a particular CRP(s) rather than cross-species incompatibility that explains the HAR of porcine xenografts. We investigated the relative effectiveness of transgenically expressed pig and human CD59 in providing protection of mouse hearts from human complement in an ex vivo setting. Transgenic mice expressing pig CD59 or human CD59 under the control of the human ICAM-2 promoter, which restricts expression in tissues to vascular endothelium, were used. Hearts from mice expressing similar levels of pig CD59 or human CD59 were perfused ex vivo with 10% human plasma and heart function was monitored for 60 min. Sections of perfused hearts were examined for deposition of the membrane attack complex (MAC). Control nontransgenic hearts (n=5) were rapidly affected by the addition of human plasma, with mean function falling to less than 10% of the initial level within 15 min. In contrast, hearts expressing either pig CD59 (n=6) or human CD59 (n=8) were protected from plasma-induced injury, maintaining 31 and 35% function, respectively, after 60 min of perfusion. MAC deposition was markedly reduced in both pig CD59 and human CD59 transgenic hearts compared to nontransgenic control hearts. When highly expressed on endothelium in transgenic mice, pig CD59 provided equivalent protection to human CD59 in a model of human complement-mediated xenograft rejection. Thus supranormal expression of endogenous porcine CRPs may be a feasible alternative to the expression of human CRPs in preventing HAR of pig-to-primate xenografts. 