Complement activation by anti-endothelial cell antibodies in MHC-mismatched and MHC-matched heart allograft rejection: anti-MHC-, but not anti non-MHC alloantibodies are effective in complement activation. Classical complement activation is a major effector mechanism in the development of vascular lesions contributing to allograft rejection. We investigated complement activation by alloantibodies reactive with graft endothelial cell (EC) alloantigens in settings of MHC-mismatched and MHC-matched (non-MHC-mismatched) rat heart transplantation (Tx). Allosera and heart allografts were collected at the day of rejection (day 7-8 and day 28-35 in MHC-mismatched and non-MHC-mismatched Tx respectively) or earlier. Allosera reactivity was studied in vitro using rat-heart-endothelial-cell (RHEC) lines expressing the appropriate donor MHC and non-MHC alloantigen profile. Immunohistochemical analysis of rejected heart allografts showed deposition of alloantibodies in both MHC-mismatched and MHC-matched heart allografts, but expression of C3 was only seen in the vasculature of MHC-mismatched grafts. FACS analysis showed that anti MHC as well as anti non-MHC allosera were reactive with donor EC cell surface antigens. Both sera had similar IgG subclass profiles of anti-endothelial cell antibodies. Complement activation by anti MHC and anti non-MHC alloantibodies on EC was measured by FACS analysis of C3 and C5b-9 (MAC) expression. Distinct expression of C3 was noticed for EC incubated with anti-MHC allosera, but hardly for EC incubated with anti non-MHC allosera. C5b-9 was low but showed no difference between the two allosera. However, complement-mediated cytotoxicity experiments showed that functional (lytic) MAC was induced with anti MHC allosera but hardly with anti non-MHC allosera. Our data show that in settings of MHC-matched heart transplantation alloantibodies against endothelial non-MHC alloantigens are generated, but, in contrast to alloantibodies to MHC alloantigens, these alloantibodies have only poor complement-activating and lytic potentials. Whether anti non-MHC allolantibodies effect other biological processes relevant for heart allograft vasculopathy, including development of graft arteriosclerosis, needs further elucidation. 