Hyperacute rejection of vascularized heart transplants in BALB/c Gal knockout mice. Pig-to-primate vascularized xenografts undergo hyperacute rejection (HAR). This results from pre-formed xenoreactive antibodies directed against galactose-alpha1,3-galactose (alphaGal) in the donor organ and activation of the complement cascade. We describe an in vivo murine model of HAR using a BALB/c mice system devoid of histocompatibility or complement differences between donor and recipient to investigate in isolation, the effects of alphaGal epitope and anti-alphaGal antibody interactions in causing rejection of vascularized heart transplants. Gal KO mice were immunized with rabbit red blood cell membranes to induce high anti-alphaGal antibody titers that were predominantly IgM by ELISA (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay). When alphaGal-expressing mice hearts were transplanted heterotopically into these recipients (n= 12), 67% of grafts rejected within 24 h, the majority within 16 h with histological features of HAR. In contrast, none of the grafts in the non-immunized Gal KO recipient control group (n=11) underwent HAR. Interestingly, approximately 50% of the remaining grafts in both the immunized and non-immunized Gal KO recipient group were rejected between 7 and 27 days by a rejection process characterized by a dense infiltrate of macrophage/monocytes, perivascular cuffing and tissue destruction similar to recent descriptions of delayed xenograft rejection (DXR). In addition, some grafts (21.5%) continued to survive in the immunized Gal KO recipients despite the presence of anti-alphaGal antibody and normal complement activity and these showed well-preserved myocardium when harvested whilst still functioning well at days 30 or 90. No rejection was seen when Gal KO donors were used in this system (n=4), nor when alphaGal-expressing BALB/c hearts were transplanted into alphaGal-expressing BALB/c recipients (n=5). This in vivo small animal model offers the opportunity to test a variety of strategies to overcome HAR prior to more resource intensive pig-to-primate studies, and may provide insights into the processes similar to DXR and accommodation. 