Prevention of hyperacute xenograft rejection in orthotopic xenotransplantation of pig hearts into baboons using immunoadsorption of antibodies and complement factors. To prevent hyperacute xenograft rejection (HXR) caused by preformed natural antibodies (XNAb) after orthotopic heart xenotransplantation (oXHTx) of landrace pig hearts into baboons, we used immunoadsorption of immunoglobulins IgG, IgM and IgA and complement with the reusable Ig-Therasorb column. In addition to functional data, tissue was sampled for histological, immunohistochemical and electron microscopical analysis. We performed three oXHTx of landrace pig hearts to baboons using extracorporeal circulation (ECC) connected to the immunoadsorption unit. Intraoperative treatment consisted of four cycles of immunoabsorption (IA). One oXHTx of a baboon without IA served as a control. A mismatch of donor and recipient heart size was prevented by selecting a 30-40% lower body weight of donor pigs than recipients. Four cycles of IA removed more than 80% of IgG, IgM and IgA, 86% of antipig antibodies and 66% of complement factors C3 and C4 from plasma. The graft of the control animal failed after 29 min. Orthotopic xenotransplantation with IA was selectively terminated after 100 min, 11 h and 21 h, respectively without any histological signs of HXR in light and electron microscopy. After weaning off from ECC these donor xenografts showed sufficient function with normal ECG and excellent cardiac output in echocardiography and invasive measurement (1.93 +/- 0.035 l/min). The myocardium of the control xenograft demonstrated more deposits of Ig and complement components (C3, C4) than in the IA group. Baboons survive HXR after orthotopic pig heart xenotransplantation due to antibody depletion by reusable Ig-Therasorb column treatment. Long-term survival in an orthotopic baboon xenotransplantation model after IA, especially in combination with transgenic pig organs, could be a reliable preclinical trial for future clinical xenotransplantation programs. 