Report of the Xenotransplantation Advisory Committee of the International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation: the present status of xenotransplantation and its potential role in the treatment of end-stage cardiac and pulmonary diseases. An urgent and steadily increasing need exists world-wide for a greater supply of donor thoracic organs. Xenotransplantation offers the possibility of an unlimited supply of hearts and lungs that could be available electively when required. However, anti-body- mediated mechanisms cause the rejection of pig organs transplanted into non-human primates, and these mechanisms provide major immunologic barriers that have not yet been overcome. Having reviewed the literature on xenotransplantation, we present a number of conclusions on its present status with regard to thoracic organs, and we make a number of recommendations relating to eventual clinical trials. Although pig hearts have functioned in heterotopic sites in non-human primates for periods of several weeks, median survival of orthotopically transplanted hearts is currently ,1 month. No transplanted pig lung has functioned for even 24 hours. Current experimental results indicate that a clinical trial would be premature. A potential risk exists, hitherto undetermined, of transferring infectious organisms along with the donor pig organ to the recipient, and possibly to other members of the community. A clinical trial of xeno-transplantation should not be undertaken until experts in microbiology and the relevant regulatory authorities consider this risk to be minimal. A clinical trial should be considered when approximately 60% survival of life-supporting pig organs in non-human primates has been achieved for a minimum of 3 months, with at least 10 animals surviving for this minimum period. Furthermore, evidence should suggest that longer survival (.6 months) can be achieved. These results should be achieved in the absence of life-threatening complications caused by the immunosuppressive regimen used. The relationship between the presence of anti-HLA antibody and anti-pig antibody and their cross-reactivity, and the outcome of pig-organ xenotransplantation in recipients previously sensitized to HLA antigens require further investigation. We recommend that the patients who initially enter into a clinical trial of cardiac xenotransplantation be unacceptable for allotransplantation, or acceptable for allotransplantation but unlikely to survive until a human cadaveric organ becomes available, and in whom mechanical assist-device bridging is not possible. National bodies that have wide-reaching government-backed control over all aspects of the trials should regulate the initial clinical trial and all subsequent clinical xenotransplantation procedures for the foreseeable future. We recommend coordination and monitoring of these trials through an international body, such as the International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation, and setting up a registry to record and widely disperse the results of these trials. Xenotransplantation has the potential to solve the problem of donor-organ supply, and therefore research in this field should be actively encouraged and supported. 