Assessment of an extracorporeal life support to LVAD bridge to heart transplant strategy. Extracorporeal life support (ECLS) is an effective technique for providing emergent circulatory assistance. However, its use in adult patients is associated with poor survival when myocardial function fails to recover. Due to the prolonged waiting times for heart transplantation, ECLS as a bridge to transplant is associated with poor survival. In addition, ECLS has been reported to be a significant risk factor for death after bridging to an implantable left ventricular assist device (LVAD). After acquisition of the HeartMate LVAD (Thermo Cardiosystems, Inc) in October 1996, we began using ECLS as a bridge to an implantable LVAD and subsequently transplantation in selected high-risk patients. From October 1, 1996 to December 1, 1999, 60 adult patients presenting with cardiogenic shock were evaluated for circulatory assistance. Twenty-five patients (group 1) with cardiac arrest or severe hemodynamic instability and multiorgan failure were placed on ECLS. Eight patients survived to LVAD implant, 1 was bridged directly to transplant, and 4 weaned from ECLS. Nine patients in group 1 survived to discharge. Thirty patients (group 2) underwent LVAD implant without ECLS. Twenty-three were bridged to transplant, with 22 surviving to discharge. Five patients (group 3) were placed on extracorporeal ventricular assist with 3 bridged to transplant and all surviving to discharge. One-year actuarial survival from the initiation of circulatory support was 36% (group 1), 73% (group 2), and 60% (group 3). One-year actuarial survival from the time of LVAD implant in group 1, conditional on surviving ECLS, was 75% (p = NS compared with group 2). In selected high-risk patients, LVAD survival after initial ECLS was not different from survival after LVAD support alone. An initial period of resuscitation with ECLS is an effective strategy to salvage patients with cardiac arrest or extreme hemodynamic instability and multiorgan injury. 