Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy predicts impending cardiac allograft rejection before endomyocardial biopsy. The invasive nature of endomyocardial biopsy has led to a search for alternative diagnostic modalities for the detection of cardiac allograft rejection. To date, no non-invasive test meets all the requirements for the detection of acute and chronic rejection. The rejection process usually presents with lymphocyte infiltration with or without myocyte necrosis, which indicates the severity of cardiac allograft rejection and the necessity of treatment. Activated lymphocytes express somatostatin receptors; thus somatostatin receptor imaging could be used to target them. The aim of this study was to assess the feasibility of using somatostatin receptor imaging to target activated lymphocytes in the process of cardiac allograft rejection. Thirteen somatostatin receptor imaging studies were performed on ten cardiac allograft recipients 12-4,745 days after transplantation, simultaneously with endomyocardial biopsy, to assess the imaging of activated lymphocytes in comparison with histological findings. Somatostatin receptor imaging was performed 4 h after the injection of 110 MBq of the somatostatin analogue indium-111 pentetreotide. 111In-pentetreotide uptake was visually scored and semi-quantitatively estimated by the calculation of a heart-to-lung ratio (HLR). The visual score correlated with the HLR. Intense/moderate uptake on visual assessment and an HLR >1.6 was observed in eight studies. In three of these studies there was significant rejection in the simultaneous endomyocardial biopsy [International Society of Heart and Lung Transplantation (ISHLT) rejection grade 3A/4]. Intense/moderate uptake was associated with mild or no rejection in the remaining five patients, and in four of them the next endomyocardial biopsy performed 1 week later demonstrated significant rejection requiring treatment. Two patients with low uptake and an HLR <1.6 had no evidence of rejection either in the simultaneous endomyocardial biopsy or in the endomyocardial biopsy performed the following week. These preliminary results indicate the feasibility of targeting activated lymphocytes with somatostatin receptor imaging in the detection of cardiac allograft rejection. Somatostatin receptor imaging may predict impending rejection at least 1 week before the endomyocardial biopsy becomes positive. The late appearance of diagnostic endomyocardial biopsy probably reflects a lag-time between lymphocytic activation and induction of myocyte damage. Furthermore, somatostatin receptor imaging at 4 h may in any case allow earlier intervention in the event of rejection, given the time required for histological processing of endomyocardial biopsy. 