Heart and liver xenotransplantation under low-dose tacrolimus: graft survival after withdrawal of immunosuppression. The hamster-to-rat xenotransplantation model is a useful model to investigate the features of extended host response to long-surviving xenografts. Early xenoantibody responses are T-cell independent and resistant to tacrolimus. Treatment with the combination of mofetil mycophenolate plus FK506 avoids acute xenograft rejection completely, but after withdrawal of immunosuppression hamster grafts are rejected by a process called late xenograft rejection (LXR). Hamster hearts and livers were transplanted into Lewis rats. Grafted rats were treated with mofetil mycophenolate (25 mg/kg/day) for 8 days and FK506 (0.2 mg/kg/day) for 31 days. Serum IgM and IgG levels were determined by flow cytometry and interferon-gamma levels by ELISA. IgM, IgG, and C3 deposits were measured in tissue by immunofluorescence, and leukocyte infiltration was measured by immunoperoxidase staining. Results. Survival of heart and liver xenografts in the rats was 48+/-4 days and 63+/-8 days, respectively. After cessation of all immunosuppression, hearts were rejected in 18+/-4 days and livers in 33+/-8 days. Production sequences of xenoantibodies in the two organs differed substantially, especially 7 days after transplantation and at the moment of rejection. Quantification of interferon-gamma levels indicated that there were no significant changes after transplantation. Histological and immunohistochemical studies showed signs of humoral mechanism of LXR in rats undergoing heart transplantation and cellular mechanism of LXR in those that received a liver transplant. Conclusions. These observations suggest that rejection in the hamster-to-rat heart xenotransplantation model is mediated by a T cell-independent B-cell response to which a T cell-dependent B-cell response is added in LXR. In the liver xenotransplantation model, our hypothesis is that LXR is mediated by a mixed cell mechanism, involving lymphocytes CD4+ CD45RC+, macrophages, and cytotoxic T lymphocytes. In summary, we have demonstrated and compared the peculiar features of LXR in two different organs. 