Clinical diagnosis and management strategies in arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy. Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) is a myocardial disease, often familial, that is characterized by fibro-fatty replacement of the right ventricular (RV) myocardium. The most common clinical manifestations of ARVC consists of ventricular arrhythmias of RV origin, which may lead to sudden death mostly in young people and athletes, electrocardiograph depolarization/repolarization changes mostly localized to right precordial leads, and global and/or regional dysfunction and structural alterations of the RV. The diagnosis of ARVC may be difficult due to several problems with the specificity of the electrocardiograph abnormalities, the different potential etiologies of ventricular arrhythmias with a left bundle branch morphology, the assessment of the RV structure and function, and the interpretation of endomyocardial biopsy findings. Therefore, standardized diagnostic criteria have been proposed by the Study Group on ARVC of the European Society of Cardiology. According to these guidelines, the diagnosis of ARVC is based on the presence of major and minor criteria encompassing electrocardiograph, arrhythmic, morphofunctional, histopathologic, and genetic factors. Because the assessment of sudden death risk in patients with ARVC is still not well established, there are no precise guidelines to determine which are the patients who need to be treated and which is the best management approach. The therapeutic options include beta blockers, antiarrhythmic drugs, catheter ablation, and implantable cardioverter defibrillator. The implantable defibrillator is the most effective safe-guard against arrhythmic sudden death. However, its precise role in changing natural history of ARVC by preventing sudden and nonsudden death needs to be evaluated by a prospective study of a large series of patients. In patients in whom ARVC has progressed to severe RV or biventricular systolic dysfunction with risk of thromboembolic complications, treatment consists of current therapy for heart failure including anticoagulant therapy. In case of refractory congestive heart failure, the patients may become candidates for heart transplantation. 