Carvedilol in the treatment of chronic heart failure. Along with the angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs), the beta-adrenergic receptor blockers have gradually emerged to be standard in the therapy of heart failure. Individual beta-blockers that have been shown to reduce all-cause mortality in patients with heart failure include bisoprolol, metoprolol and carvedilol. Carvedilol distinguishes from the other beta-blockers as being a non-selective beta(1)- and beta(2)-receptor blocker with (1)-receptor blockade effect and anti-oxidant properties. The drug does not have sympathomimetic activity and has vasodilatory effects attributable to its (1)-receptor blockade property. Experimental and clinical studies have confirmed carvedilol's vasodilator, anti-oxidant and anti-apoptotic properties, which may contribute to its effect in reversing cardiac remodelling in animal models and patients with heart failure. These pharmacological properties render carvedilol a potentially useful agent in the treatment of patients with heart failure. Early studies of carvedilol in heart failure have reported beneficial haemodynamic effects but variable effects on exercise tolerance and clinical well being. The large-scale US Carvedilol Heart Failure Program and the Australian/New Zealand Heart Failure Collaborative Research Group reported beneficial effects of carvedilol on mortality, morbidity and clinical well being in patients with mild-to-moderate heart failure. The recently reported but yet unpublished preliminary results of the COPERNICUS study suggest that carvedilol improves mortality and morbidity in patients with advanced heart failure and severe symptoms. At this time, it is unclear whether the ancillary pharmacological properties of carvedilol can be translated to more superior clinical benefit compared to the other beta-blockers. Preliminary studies examining surrogate end points suggest that carvedilol may improve left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) more than metoprolol. More conclusive information regarding their relative effects of clinical outcomes will await the completion of the COMET study, which compares the effect of metoprolol and carvedilol on mortality and morbidity, expected at the end of the year 2002. 