Recovery of cardiac function after standard hypothermic storage versus preservation with Peg-hemoglobin. Preservation of the heart for transplantation after infusion of cardioplegia and extirpation of a cardiac allograft results in an ischemic insult to the myocardium. This ischemic insult may lead to a loss of function in the transplanted heart. Hypothermic perfusion preservation with an oxygen hemoglobin carrying solution may avert ischemic injury and lead to improved recovery of cardiac function. The purpose of this study was to compare cardiac function after 8 hours of continuous hypothermic perfusion with a unique polyethylene-glycol-hemoglobin (PEG-Hb) solution to hearts preserved by 4 hours of hypothermic ischemic storage. Freshly extirpated hearts served as functional controls. The hearts of 26 anesthetized and intubated New Zealand white rabbits were harvested after cold cardioplegic arrest. Group I (n = 12) hearts were perfused with a PEG-Hb solution at 20 degrees C and 30 mm Hg for 8 hours. PO2 was maintained > or = 500 mm Hg. Group II (n = 7) hearts were preserved by cold ischemic storage for 4 hours at 4 degrees C. Group III (n = 7) were tested immediately after harvest. Left ventricular (LV) function was measured in the nonworking state at 15 minutes, 1 hour, and 2 hours after transfer to a standard crystalloid Langendorff circuit. Measurement of LV developed pressure, peak + dP/dt and -dP/dt revealed a superior trend between Group I and Group II hearts in comparison with freshly extirpated hearts. Heart rate was similar among all groups throughout testing (p = ns). Coronary blood flow was not significantly different between groups. Continuous perfusion preservation of rabbit hearts for 8 hours with PEG-Hb solution at 30 mm Hg and 20 degrees C yielded LV function that was similar to 4 hours of ischemic hypothermic storage. Furthermore, return of cardiac function after 8 hours of perfusion preservation using this PEG-Hb solution may be superior to that obtained in freshly extirpated hearts. These data suggest that some recovery of myocardial function may occur during perfusion preservation with this PEG-Hb solution after the ischemic insult of cardioplegic arrest. Continuous perfusion preservation using this PEG-Hb solution deserves further investigation in large animal transplant models. 