Long-term allograft acceptance induced by single dose anti-leukocyte common antigen (RT7) antibody in the rat. In clinical organ transplantation monoclonal antibodies (mAb) to different surface molecules of immunocompetent cells become integral parts of the immunosuppressive therapy. In this study, a mAb against the rat leukocyte common antigen CD45 (RT7) was tested for its immunosuppressive potency after a single perioperative injection. Binding and depleting properties of the anti-RT7 mAb were investigated by flow cytometry. In the fully major histocompatibility complex-disparate heart and skin transplantation models (LEW [RT1l]--> LEW.1W [RT1u]), a single dose of anti-RT7 mAb (10 mg/kg) was administered intravenously (day -1). To characterize the long-term acceptance of heart allografts second set skin transplantation (day 100), mixed lymphocyte reaction studies (day 100) and reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analysis for intragraft cytokine expression (day 200) were performed. The anti-RT7 mAb bound to nearly all hematopoietic lineage cells, but particularly T and NK cells, and profoundly depleted these cells in circulation and lymphoid tissues. Anti-RT7 mAb-treated rats showed long-term acceptance of heart allografts (>200 days; n=12), whereas untreated recipients rejected allografts by day 8 (n=6). In contrast to hearts, primary skin allograft survival was only moderately prolonged. Animals with stable heart allograft acceptance showed normal in vitro lymphocyte proliferation responses to donor and third party antigen. These recipients also acutely rejected second set donor-strain skin grafts without inducing rejection of persisting heart allografts. Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analysis of intragraft cytokines showed up-regulation of Fas-ligand and IL-4 mRNA in long-surviving heart allografts. The findings demonstrate that a single injection of an anti-RT7 mAb in the rat can induce stable long-term acceptance of heart allografts by transient but profound T-cell depletion. Local immunoregulatory mechanisms seem to play a role for maintenance of long-term graft acceptance. 