Safety and efficacy of pravastatin therapy for the prevention of hyperlipidemia in pediatric and adolescent cardiac transplant recipients. Hyperlipidemia is common after cardiac transplantation and it is a risk factor for post-transplantation coronary artery disease. Immunosuppression with corticosteroids and cyclosporine has been associated with hyperlipidemia. Pravastatin, a HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor, has been shown to be effective and safe for cholesterol reduction in adult heart transplant recipients. To our knowledge the safety and efficacy of pravastatin therapy in pediatric and adolescent heart transplant populations have not been previously analyzed. Therefore, we evaluated lipid profiles, liver transaminases, rejection data, and possible side effects in pediatric and adolescent cardiac transplant recipients treated with pravastatin. The study group consisted of 40 cardiac transplant recipients 10 to 21 years old (mean age 16.9 years). Twenty-two patients received pravastatin in addition to an immunosuppressive regimen of either cyclosporine or tacrolimus, azathioprine or mycophenolate mofetil, and prednisone. Serial determinations of total cholesterol (TC), low-density lipoprotein (LDL), high-density lipoprotein, and triglycerides were available for all pravastatin-treated patients. Pre-treatment lipid values and hepatic transaminases were compared with those measured after therapy with pravastatin. Comparison of pravastatin-induced lipid reduction between groups treated with cyclosporine vs tacrolimus was also made. Patients receiving pravastatin experienced a mean 32 mg/dl decrease in TC (p < 0.005) and a mean 31 mg/dl decrease in LDL (p < 0.005), regardless of their immunosuppressive regimen. No statistical differences occurred in the magnitude of mean lipid reduction induced by pravastatin between the groups treated with cyclosporine vs tacrolimus. No significant changes in hepatic transaminase levels were noted, and no clinical evidence of pravastatin-induced myositis occurred in any subjects. Pravastatin therapy is effective and safe when used in pediatric and adolescent cardiac transplant recipients. Although the pravastatin-induced reduction in TC and LDL was more pronounced in patients receiving cyclosporine, the reduction was not statistically different from that in the tacrolimus group. No evidence of hepatic dysfunction or rhabdomyolysis in patients treated with pravastatin was noted. Long-term studies are required to evaluate the effect of pravastatin therapy on the incidence of accelerated coronary atherosclerosis in this population. 