Differences in clinical profile and survival after heart transplantation according to prior heart disease. The objective of this study was to compare baseline characteristics and long-term survival among patients undergoing heart transplantation (HT) according to the 3 main types of prior heart disease: ischemic, idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy (IDC), and valvular. Four hundred twenty-three HTs performed between 1989 and 2005 were included. We excluded pediatric transplantation, retransplantations, combined transplantations (lung and kidney), and transplantations due to heart diseases other than ischemic, IDC, and valvular. Baseline characteristics of the recipients were analyzed, as well as short-term and long- term survival by groups. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used for continuous variables and chi-square was used for categorical variables. Survival analysis was computed using Kaplan-Meier curves and the log-rank test, as well as multivariate analysis using logistic regression. The ischemic and valvular heart disease groups were older and had a more frequent history of prior heart surgery and circulatory support at the time of transplantation compared with the IDC group. The incidence of arterial hypertension and dyslipidemia was higher among ischemic heart disease recipients. Survival rates at 30 days did not show significant differences (ischemic, 88%; IDC, 93%; and valvular; 84%; P = .21). Long-term survival rates were greater in the IDC than in the valvular or ischemic heart disease groups (75% vs 65% and 62%, respectively; P = .021). The multivariate analysis showed an association between the IDC group and long-term survival (odds ratio [OR], 0.55; 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.35-0.89; P = .015). (1) Patients showed a different clinical profiles depending on their pretransplantation heart disease. (2) There were no differences in early mortality between the groups. (3) Long-term survival was significantly greater among IDC transplant recipients and similar in ischemic and valvular heart disease transplant recipients. 