Use of ventricular assist device as a bridge to cardiac transplantation: impact of age and other determinants on outcomes. We sought to compare outcomes in patients > or = 60 years of age with those of their younger counterparts who underwent ventricular assist device implantation intended as a bridge to cardiac transplantation and also to identify retrospectively additional pre- and postoperative factors that might portend adverse outcomes.The medical records of 88 patients who were treated with bridge-to-transplantation ventricular assist devices from 1996 through 2007 were reviewed. Laboratory values, hemodynamic parameters, and the need for hemodynamic support were evaluated. Postoperative complications and bridge-to-transplantation success rates versus death rates were evaluated. Seventeen patients were > or = 60 years old and 71 patients were < 60 years old. In the older group, 59% of patients underwent successful bridging to transplantation, compared with 69% of the younger patients (P = 0.41). Multivariate analysis distinguished age > or = 60, female sex, earlier time period of operation, higher mean pulmonary arterial and central venous pressures, need for preoperative intra-aortic balloon pumps, and postoperative respiratory failure as independent risk factors for death. After orthotopic heart transplantation, survival to hospital discharge was 100% in the older group and 93.9% in the younger patients. Median lengths of stay were similar in both age categories.Multivariate analysis identified age as 1 of 6 independent risk factors for death in this study. Patients who successfully underwent cardiac transplantation, however, had similar survival statistics regardless of age category. Case-by-case evaluation is warranted when analyzing risk-benefit ratios of bridge-to-transplantation ventricular assist device therapy in the older patient population. 'Aged', 'heart failure, congestive/surgery', 'heart transplantation', 'heart-assist devices/statistics & numerical data', 'multivariate analysis', 'retrospective studies', 'risk assessment', 'risk factors', 'treatment outcome'