NO: 1
Heart transplantation is a life-saving procedure that has seen improvements in transplant and patien
t outcomes due to advances in immunosuppression and prevention of posttransplantation infectious epi
sodes (IEps). This study systematically evaluates IEps in the modern era of heart transplantation at
 Stanford University Medical Center. This is a single-center retrospective review that includes 279 
consecutive adult heart transplantation recipients from January 2008 to September 2017. Baseline dem
ographic, clinical, serological, and outcomes information were collected. Kaplan-Meier estimator was
 used to assess survival stratified by IEp occurrence within the first year. A total of 600 IEps occ
urred in 279 patients (2.15 IEps per patient) during a median follow-up period of 3 years. Overall s
urvival was 83.3% (95% confidence interval [CI], 76.2-88.4) at 1 year posttransplantation for those 
with any IEp compared with 93.0% (95% CI, 87.2-96.4) in those without IEp (P = 0.07). Bacterial IEps
 were the most common (n = 375; 62.5%), followed by viral (n = 180; 30.0%), fungal (n = 40; 6.7%), a
nd parasitic (n = 5; 0.8%). IEps by Gram-negative bacteria (n = 210) outnumbered those by Gram-posit
ive bacteria (n = 142). Compared with prior studies from our center, there was a decreased proportio
n of viral (including cytomegalovirus), fungal (including Aspergillus spp. and non-Aspergillus spp. 
molds), and Nocardia infections. There were no IEps due to Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Pneumocystis 
jirovecii, or Toxoplasma gondii. A significant reduction in viral, fungal, and Nocardia IEps after h
eart transplantation was observed, most likely due to advancements in immunosuppression and preventi
ve strategies, including pretransplant infectious diseases screening and antimicrobial prophylaxis.

NO: 2
The number of congenital heart disease (CHD) patients with heart failure is expanding. These patient
s have a high probability of dying while awaiting heart transplant. The potential for durable ventri
cular assist devices (VAD) to improve waiting list survival in CHD is unknown. We conducted an analy
sis of the Scientific Registry of Transplant Recipients database for the primary outcome of death or
 delisting due to clinical worsening while listed for heart transplant. We compared CHD patients wit
h non-CHD patients matched for listing status. Multivariable models were constructed to account for 
confounding variables. Congenital heart disease patients were less likely to have a VAD and were mor
e likely to experience the primary outcome of death or delisting due to clinical worsening compared 
to non-CHD patients. Ventricular assist devices decreased the probability of experiencing the primar
y outcome for non-CHD but not for CHD patients with a final listing status of 1A. Ventricular assist
 devices increased the probability of experiencing the primary outcome among CHD patients for those 
with a final listing status of 1B with no impact in non-CHD patients. Among non-CHD patients who die
d or were delisted, the time to the primary outcome was delayed by VAD, with a similar trend in CHD.
 Except for patients with a final listing status of 1B, VAD does not adversely affect waiting list o
utcomes in CHD patients listed for heart transplant. Ventricular assist devices may prolong waiting 
list survival among high-risk CHD patients.

NO: 3
Cardiomyopathies might lead to end-stage heart disease with the requirement of drastic treatments li
ke bridging up to transplant or heart transplantation. A not precisely known proportion of these dis
eases are genetically determined. We genotyped 43 index-patients (30 DCM, 10 ARVC, 3 RCM) with advan
ced or end stage cardiomyopathy using a gene panel which covered 46 known cardiomyopathy disease gen
es. Fifty-three variants with possible impact on disease in 33 patients were identified. Of these 27
 (51%) were classified as likely pathogenic or pathogenic in the MYH7, MYL2, MYL3, NEXN, TNNC1, TNNI
3, DES, LMNA, PKP2, PLN, RBM20, TTN, and CRYAB genes. Fifty-six percent (n = 24) of index-patients c
arried a likely pathogenic or pathogenic mutation. Of these 75% (n = 18) were familial and 25% (n = 
6) sporadic cases. However, severe cardiomyopathy seemed to be not characterized by a specific mutat
ion profile. Remarkably, we identified a novel homozygous PKP2-missense variant in a large consangui
neous family with sudden death in early childhood and several members with heart transplantation in 
adolescent age.

NO: 4
Historically, patients bridged on extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) to heart transplantatio
n (HT) have very high post-transplant mortality. In the new heart transplant allocation system, ECMO
-supported patients have the highest priority for HT. However, data are lacking on the outcomes of t
hese critically ill patients. We compared the waitlist and post-transplant outcomes of ECMO-supporte
d patients in the new and old allocation systems. Adult patients supported by ECMO at the time of li
sting or transplantation who were registered in the United Network for Organ Sharing database betwee
n November 1, 2015 and September 30, 2019 were included. Clinical characteristics, outcomes in the w
aitlist, and post-transplant survival were compared between the old and new systems. Cox Proportiona
l and subdistribution hazard regression models were used to evaluate the variables contributing to t
he post-transplant and waitlist outcomes RESULTS: A total of 296 ECMO-supported patients were listed
 for HT. Of these, 191 were distributed to the old system, and 105 were distributed to the new syste
m. Patients listed in the new system had a higher cumulative incidence of HT (p < 0.001) and lower i
ncidence of death or removal (p = 0.001) from the transplant list than patients listed in the old sy
stem. The 6-month survival after transplantation was 74.6% and 90.6% for the old- and new-era patien
ts, respectively (p = 0.002). Among ECMO-supported patients, being listed or transplanted on the new
 system was independently associated with improved outcomes in the waitlist and after transplantatio
n. With the implementation of the new heart transplant allocation system, ECMO-supported patients ha
ve a shorter waitlist time, improved frequency of HT, and improved short-term post-transplant surviv
al.

NO: 5
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection remains a major complication after heart transplantation with varyin
g prophylaxis strategies employed. We sought to determine the impact of valganciclovir (VGC) duratio
n on the epidemiology of CMV infections after heart transplantation. We performed a prospective coho
rt study of CMV donor (D) or recipient (R) seropositive heart transplant recipients from 2005 to 201
2 who completed VGC prophylaxis, ranging from 3 to 12 months according to serostatus and induction i
mmunosuppression. Univariate and multivariate logistic regression was performed. Among 159 heart tra
nsplant recipients during the study period, 130 (82%) were eligible for VGC prophylaxis. CMV D/R ser
ostatus was as follows: 24% D+/R-, 30% D+/R+, and 29% D-/R+. 65% and 21% received basiliximab and th
ymoglobulin induction, respectively, followed by maintenance tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil, and 
prednisone. Twenty-one (16%) recipients suffered CMV infection. There was no association with comorb
idities including diabetes mellitus, chronic kidney disease, or mechanical assist devices, nor were 
there associations with rejection, treatments of rejection, or mortality. When VGC prophylaxis durat
ion was stratified by ≤6 vs ≥12 months, time from heart transplantation to CMV infection was delayed
 (median 247 vs 452 days, P = .002) but there was no difference in days from VGC discontinuation to 
onset of CMV infection (median 72 vs 83 days, P = .31). CMV infection occurred most frequently withi
n 6-16 weeks of VGC cessation, and 95% of infections occurred during the 6 months post-prophylaxis p
eriod. Relative to ≤6 months, ≥12 months of VGC did not reduce incidence of CMV infection and only d
elayed time to onset. 95% of CMV infection occurs within 6 months after cessation of VGC.

NO: 6
The Canadian status 4S category prioritizes highly sensitized patients with a calculated panel react
ive antibody (CPRA) > 80% awaiting heart transplantation. We examined the effect of sensitization an
d status 4S and developed a predictive model to estimate waiting time in Canada. A retrospective rev
iew was performed of patients listed for heart transplant at the Ottawa Heart Institute and Toronto 
General Hospital (Ontario, Canada). We evaluated the association of CPRA and priority listing status
 on waiting time and post-transplant outcomes. Waiting time risk factor analysis was performed using
 a multivariable parametric accelerated failure time model with a Weibull distribution. Of 394 patie
nts listed (75% male, 51 ± 12 years), 291 (74%) received a transplant and 33 (8%) died waiting. The 
cumulative incidence of transplant decreased across higher CPRA groups but was similar for moderatel
y and highly sensitized groups: 67%, 70%, 50%, and 40% at 12 months for CPRA 0%, 1% to 50%, 51% to 8
0%, and > 80%, respectively (p = 0.020). Status 4S patients experienced longer waiting times compare
d with other high priority status 3.5 and 4 and had increased risk of death on the waiting list (p =
 0.014). Over a median follow-up of 2.4 years (interquartile range, 1.2-4.1), rejection occurred in 
64 sensitized patients (24%) compared with 24 non-sensitized patients (9%; p = 0.019), but there was
 no difference in survival, allograft dysfunction, or cardiac allograft vasculopathy. A model predic
ting transplant waiting time, including CPRA, blood group, priority listing status, age, and weight,
 was developed and showed adequate discrimination and calibration. Waiting time to heart transplant 
is increased for highly and moderately sensitized patients, suggesting the need to reevaluate the CP
RA > 80% threshold for status 4S prioritization in Canada. Extended waiting times, despite 4S priori
tization, supports consideration of additional factors to CPRA in ensuring equitable organ access fo
r sensitized patients.

NO: 7
Enhanced platelet reactivity may play a role in cardiac allograft vasculopathy (CAV) progression. Th
e use of antiplatelet agents after heart transplantation (HT) has been inconsistent and although asp
irin (ASA) is often a part of the medication regimen after HT, limited evidence is available on its 
benefit. CAV progression was assessed by measuring the difference in plaque volume and plaque index 
between the last follow-up and the baseline coronary intravascular ultrasound examination. Overall, 
529 HT recipients were retrospectively analyzed (337 had ≥2 intravascular ultrasound studies). The p
rogression in plaque volume (P = .007) and plaque index (P = .002) was significantly attenuated amon
g patients treated with early ASA (within the first year after HT). Over a 6.7-year follow-up, all-c
ause mortality was lower with early ASA compared with late or no ASA use (P < .001). No cardiac deat
hs were observed in the early ASA group, and the risk of CAV-related graft dysfunction was significa
ntly lower in this group (P = .03). However, the composite of all CAV-related events (cardiac death,
 CAV-related graft dysfunction, or coronary angioplasty) was not significantly different between the
 groups (P = .16). Early ASA use after HT may delay CAV progression and decrease mortality and CAV-r
elated graft dysfunction, but does not seem to affect overall CAV-associated events.

NO: 8
Following second heart transplantation (HTx), some patients experience graft failure and require thi
rd-time heart transplantation. Little data exist to guide decision-making with regard to repeat retr
ansplantation in older patients. We performed a retrospective cohort analysis of patients receiving 
a third HTx, as identified in the United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS) database from 1985 to 2017
. The study cohort consisted of N = 60 patients, with an average age of 29 with a standard deviation
 of ±18 years. Overall survival for the cohort at 1, 5, and 10 years is 83%, 64%, and 44%, respectiv
ely. The rate of third-time HTxs has steadily increased in all age groups. Patients older than 50 ye
ars now account for 18.3% of all third-time HTxs. Although this group demonstrated longer average pr
evious graft survival, after third HTx they demonstrate significantly poorer survival outcomes compa
red to third-time HTx recipients younger than 21 (P = 0.05). Age over 50, BMI over 30, and diabetes 
were all found to be independent risk factors for decreased survival following third HTx. We describ
e trends in patients undergoing third HTx. We highlight subsets of such recipients who exhibit decre
ased survival.

NO: 9
Bridge to transplantation (BTT) with left ventricular assist devices (LVADs) is a mainstay of therap
y for heart failure in patients awaiting heart transplantation (HT). Criteria for HT listing do not 
differ between patients medically managed and those mechanically bridged to HT. The objectives of th
e present study were to evaluate the impact of BTT with LVAD on posttransplantation survival, to des
cribe differences in causes of 1-year mortality in medically and mechanically bridged patients, and 
to evaluate differences in risk factors for 1-year mortality between those with and those without LV
AD at the time of HT. Using the United Network of Organ Sharing database, we identified 5486 adult, 
single-organ HT recipients transplanted between 2008 and 2015. Patients were propensity matched for 
likelihood of LVAD at the time of HT. Kaplan-Meier survival estimates were used to assess the impact
 of BTT on 1- and 5-year mortality. Logistic regression analysis was used to evaluate the odds ratio
 of 1-year mortality for patients BTT with LVAD compared with those with medical management across c
linically significant variables at various thresholds. Early mortality was higher in mechanically br
idged patients: 9.5% versus 7.2% mortality at 1 year (P<0.001). BTT patients incurred an increased r
isk of 1-year mortality with an estimated glomerular filtration rate of 40 to 60 mL·min Bridge to HT
 with LVAD, although necessary because of organ scarcity and capable of improving wait list survival
, confers a significantly higher risk of early posttransplantation mortality. Patients bridged with 
mechanical support may require more careful consideration for transplant eligibility after LVAD plac
ement.

NO: 10
Allograft-specific regulatory T cells (T

NO: 11
Optimizing transplant candidates' priority for donor organs depends on the accurate assessment of po
st-transplant outcomes. Due to the complexity of transplantation and the wide range of possible seri
ous complications, recipient outcomes are difficult to predict accurately using conventional multiva
riable regression. Therefore, we evaluated the utility of 3 ML algorithms for predicting mortality a
fter pediatric HTx. We identified patients <18 years of age receiving HTx in 2006-2015 in the UNOS R
egistry database. Mortality within 1, 3, or 5 years was predicted using classification and regressio
n trees, RFs, and ANN. Each model was trained using cross-validation, then validated in a separate t
esting set. Model performance was primarily evaluated by the area under the receiver operating chara
cteristic (AUC) curve. The training set included 2802 patients, whereas 700 were included in the tes
ting set. RF achieved the best fit to the training data with AUCs of 0.74, 0.68, and 0.64 for 1-, 3-
, and 5-year mortality, respectively, and performed best in the testing data, with AUCs of 0.72, 0.6
1, and 0.60, respectively. Nevertheless, sensitivity was poor across models (training: 0.22-0.58; te
sting: 0.07-0.49). ML algorithms demonstrated fair predictive utility in both training and testing d
ata, but the sensitivity of these algorithms was generally poor. With the registry missing data on m
any determinants of long-term survival, the ability of ML methods to predict mortality after pediatr
ic HTx may be fundamentally limited.

NO: 12
Refractory postcardiotomy cardiogenic shock complicating cardiac surgery yields nearly 100% mortalit
y when untreated. Use of venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for postcardiotomy cardiog
enic shock has increased worldwide recently. The aim of the current analysis was to outline the tren
ds in use, changing patient profiles, and in-hospital outcomes including complications in patients u
ndergoing venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for postcardiotomy cardiogenic shock. Ana
lysis of extracorporeal life support organization registry from January 2010 to December 2018. Multi
center worldwide registry. Seven-thousand one-hundred eighty-five patients supported with venoarteri
al extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for postcardiotomy cardiogenic shock. Venoarterial extracorpo
real membrane oxygenation. Hospital death, weaning from extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, hospita
l complications. Mortality predictors were assessed by multivariable logistic regression. Propensity
 score matching was performed for comparison of peripheral and central cannulation for extracorporea
l membrane oxygenation. A significant trend toward more extracorporeal membrane oxygenation use in r
ecent years (coefficient, 0.009; p < 0.001) was found. Mean age was 56.3 ± 14.9 years and significan
tly increased over time (coefficient, 0.513; p < 0.001). Most commonly, venoarterial extracorporeal 
membrane oxygenation was instituted after coronary artery bypass surgery (26.8%) and valvular surger
y (25.6%), followed by heart transplantation (20.7%). Overall, successful extracorporeal membrane ox
ygenation weaning was possible in 4,520 cases (56.4%), and survival to hospital discharge was achiev
ed in 41.7% of cases. In-hospital mortality rates remained constant over time (coefficient, -8.775; 
p = 0.682), whereas complication rates were significantly reduced (coefficient, -0.009; p = 0.003). 
Higher mortality was observed after coronary artery bypass surgery (65.4%), combined coronary artery
 bypass surgery with valve (68.4%), and aortic (69.6%) procedures than other indications. Lower mort
ality rates were observed in heart transplantation recipients (46.0%). Age (p < 0.001), central cann
ulation (p < 0.001), and occurrence of complications while on extracorporeal membrane oxygenation we
re independently associated with poorer prognosis. The analysis confirmed increased use of venoarter
ial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for postcardiotomy cardiogenic shock. Mortality rates remain
ed relatively constant over time despite a decrease in complications, in the setting of supporting o
lder patients.

NO: 13
Ecthyma gangrenosum is a cutaneous manifestation of severe systemic pseudomonas infection and is com
monly associated with bacteremia. It is common in immunocompromised patients with underlying neutrop
enia or leukopenia. We report a patient with heart transplant who developed a single lesion of ecthy
ma gangrenosum in the absence of bacteremia with a review of reported cases in solid organ transplan
t patients.

NO: 14
Cardiomyopathies are a heterogeneous group of heart muscle diseases and an important cause of heart 
failure (HF). Current knowledge on incidence, pathophysiology and natural history of HF in cardiomyo
pathies is limited, and distinct features of their therapeutic responses have not been systematicall
y addressed. Therefore, this position paper focuses on epidemiology, pathophysiology, natural histor
y and latest developments in treatment of HF in patients with dilated (DCM), hypertrophic (HCM) and 
restrictive (RCM) cardiomyopathies. In DCM, HF with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) has high incid
ence and prevalence and represents the most frequent cause of death, despite improvements in treatme
nt. In addition, advanced HF in DCM is one of the leading indications for heart transplantation. In 
HCM, HF with preserved ejection (HFpEF) affects most patients with obstructive, and ∼10% of patients
 with non-obstructive HCM. A timely treatment is important, since development of advanced HF, althou
gh rare in HCM, portends a poor prognosis. In RCM, HFpEF is common, while HFrEF occurs later and mor
e frequently in amyloidosis or iron overload/haemochromatosis. Irrespective of RCM aetiology, HF is 
a harbinger of a poor outcome. Recent advances in our understanding of the mechanisms underlying the
 development of HF in cardiomyopathies have significant implications for therapeutic decision-making
. In addition, new aetiology-specific treatment options (e.g. enzyme replacement therapy, transthyre
tin stabilizers, immunoadsorption, immunotherapy, etc.) have shown a potential to improve outcomes. 
Still, causative therapies of many cardiomyopathies are lacking, highlighting the need for the devel
opment of effective strategies to prevent and treat HF in cardiomyopathies.

NO: 15
While severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection primarily causes inflam
mation in the respiratory system, there is growing evidence of extrapulmonary tissue damage mediated
 by the host innate immune system in children and adults. A cytokine storm can manifest as a viral-i
nduced haemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH). Here, we present a previously healthy 8-year-old b
oy with newly diagnosed cardiac injury and COVID-19-related HLH syndrome with haemophagocytosis in b
one marrow biopsy. After remission of inflammation, the patient underwent a heart transplant due to 
persistent cardiac failure. The histology of the explanted heart showed only a focal subtle subendoc
ardial inflammation. Three days after transplant, he developed progressive acute respiratory distres
s syndrome (ARDS) with the rise of inflammatory markers. He unfortunately died after 20 days because
 of disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). For the first time, we described a child with COVI
D-19-related HLH and severe cardiac failure, which had a poor prognosis despite a heart transplant.

NO: 16
Despite significant advances in durable mechanical support survival, infectious complications remain
 the most common adverse event after ventricular assist device (VAD) implantation and the leading ca
use of early death after transplantation. In this study, we aim to describe our local infectious epi
demiology and review short-term survival and infectious incidence rates in the post-transplantation 
period and assess risk factors for infectious episodes after transplantation. Retrospective single-c
enter study of all consecutive adult heart transplant patients from 2008 to 2017. Survival data were
 estimated and summarized using the Kaplan-Meier method. We quantified and evaluated the difference 
in the incidence rate between patients with and without infection using a Fine-Gray model. The outco
me of interest is the time to first infection diagnosis with post-transplant death as the competing 
event. Among 278 heart transplant patients, 74 (26.5%) underwent LVAD implantation. Twenty-one patie
nts (28.3%) developed an infection while supported by an LVAD. When compared to patients supported b
y an LVAD without a preceding infection, BMI was significantly greater (31.2 vs 27.8 kg/m Patients w
ith LVAD-related infection had a significantly increased risk of infectious complications after hear
t transplantation. Further research on the avoidance of induction agents and reduced maintenance imm
unosuppression in this patient population is warranted.

NO: 17
To assess current management strategies for advanced heart failure in adults with congenital heart d
isease, including heart transplantation and mechanical circulatory support. Current data demonstrate
 that adults with CHD generally experience higher short-term mortality after heart transplantation a
nd MCS implantation, but enjoy superior long-term survival. Such patients are nonetheless less likel
y to receive a transplant than non-ACHD peers due to a variety of factors, including lack of applica
bility of current listing criteria to HF in ACHD. MCS is underutilized in ACHD, but provides similar
 quality of life benefits for ACHD and non-ACHD patients alike. Heart failure in ACHD is complex and
 difficult to treat, and both heart transplantation and mechanical circulatory support are often cha
llenging to implement in this patient population. However, long-term results are encouraging, and ex
isting data supports increasing use of MCS and transplant earlier in their disease course. Multidisc
iplinary care is critical to success in these complex patients.

NO: 18
Venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation is a rescue therapy for patients in cardiogenic sho
ck. We hypothesize that patients bridged to heart transplant with extracorporeal membrane oxygenatio
n have decreased survival. The United Network of Organ Sharing database was retrospectively reviewed
 from January 1, 1999, to March 31, 2018, for heart transplant recipients. Recipients bridged with a
ny form of mechanical support and those without support were compared with recipients bridged with e
xtracorporeal membrane oxygenation. The primary end point was restricted mean survival time through 
16.7 years. Of 26,918 recipients, 15,076 required no pretransplant mechanical support (56.0%). Suppo
rt patients included 9321 with left ventricular assist devices (34.6%), 53 with right ventricular as
sist devices (0.2%), 258 with total artificial hearts (1.0%), 686 with biventricular assist devices 
(2.6%), 1378 with intra-aortic balloon pumps (5.1%), and 146 who required extracorporeal membrane ox
ygenation (0.5%). In the first 16.7 years post-transplant, compared with recipients bridged with ext
racorporeal membrane oxygenation, estimated adjusted restricted mean survival time was higher in pat
ients who required no mechanical support (16.6 months [14.0-19.4]) and patients with a left ventricu
lar assist device (16.5 months [99% confidence interval, 13.9-19.2]), an intra-aortic balloon pump (
11.2 months [8.3-14.7]), or a biventricular assist device (6.6 months [3.6-10.3]). Restricted mean s
urvival time in patients with a right ventricular assist device or a total artificial heart was simi
lar to patients with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. Recipients bridged with extracorporeal mem
brane oxygenation were estimated to survive 16.6 months less than nonmechanical circulatory support 
recipients. Bridge to heart transplant with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation is a viable option, 
and these patients should be considered transplant candidates.

NO: 19
Outcomes have improved in patients bridged to heart transplant on contemporary continuous-flow ventr
icular assist devices over the past decade. We evaluated mechanical circulatory support as a means t
o bridge patients to cardiac retransplantation. We retrospectively reviewed 464 patients who underwe
nt cardiac retransplant from the United Network for Organ Sharing database between January 2006 and 
November 2016. Pre- and post-transplant data were compared between patients bridged to retransplant 
with mechanical circulatory support (n = 81) and those without mechanical circulatory support (n = 3
83). The mean ages for the patients in the mechanical circulatory support and nonmechanical circulat
ory support cohorts were 41.2 ± 16 years and 42.1 ± 15.7 years, respectively (P = .64). Patients bri
dged with mechanical circulatory support were placed on extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (n = 29,
 35.8%), a total artificial heart (n = 13, 16.0%), or a temporary or durable ventricular assist devi
ce (n = 39, 48.1%). Twelve patients (14.8%) were placed on a second device before retransplant. Thir
ty-nine percent of the mechanical circulatory support group were indicated for listing because of pr
imary graft dysfunction or acute rejection versus 6% of the nonmechanical circulatory support group 
(P < .01). Likewise, 30% of patients in the mechanical circulatory support group were listed for car
diac allograft vasculopathy compared with 59% of the nonmechanical circulatory support group (P < .0
1). Thirty-day mortality was significantly higher in the mechanical circulatory support group (17.8%
 vs 4.8%, P < .01). However, patients who were bridged with a ventricular assist device or total art
ificial heart had comparable midterm outcomes to the nonmechanical circulatory support group. Patien
ts who require mechanical circulatory support bridge to retransplantation belong to a high-risk coho
rt. Comparable midterm outcomes to the nonmechanical circulatory support cohort were demonstrated wh
en patients' conditions allow for bridge with a ventricular assist device or total artificial heart.
 Bridging to retransplantation with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation remains a relative contraind
ication.

NO: 20
Cardiac allograft vasculopathy (CAV) is a major cause of morbidity and mortality following heart tra
nsplantation (HT). Reduced cardiovascular mortality and morbidity have been reported in non-HT patie
nts treated with metformin. Given the high prevalence of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) in HT patie
nts, we investigated the association between metformin therapy and cardiovascular outcomes after HT.
 The study population comprised 103 DM patients who had undergone HT between 1994 and 2018 and were 
prospectively followed-up. We excluded from the study patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus. Fifty-
five HT patients (53%) in the cohort were treated with metformin. Clinical data were recorded on pro
spectively designed forms. The primary outcomes included CAV, survival, and the combined end-point o
f CAV or cardiovascular mortality. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis showed that the CAV rate at 20 yea
rs of follow-up was lower in DM patients treated with metformin than in those who were not (30 vs. 6
5%; log-rank p = 0.044). Similarly, the combined risk of CAV or cardiovascular mortality was lower i
n the metformin-treated patients than in those not receiving metformin (32 vs. 68%; log rank p = 0.0
1). Consistently, multivariate analysis adjusted for age and comorbidities showed that metformin the
rapy was independently associated with a significant 90% reduction (95% confidence interval 0.02-0.4
6, p = 0.003) in the risk for the development of CAV, and a 91% reduction (95% confidence interval 0
.02-0.42; p = 0.003) in the risk for CAV or cardiovascular mortality. In diabetic HT patients, metfo
rmin therapy is independently associated with a significant reduction in the long-term risk for CAV 
and the combined end-point of CAV or cardiovascular mortality after HT.

NO: 21
Heart transplant recipients are at risk for a number of post-transplantation complications such as g
raft dysfunction, rejection, and infection. The rates of many complications are decreasing over time
, and prognosis is improving. However, these patients continue to experience significant morbidity a
nd mortality. This review focuses on the optimal management of heart transplant recipients in the po
stoperative period, based on current knowledge. More information is needed about the best ways to pr
edict, prevent, and treat primary graft dysfunction, right ventricular failure, and cellular and ant
ibody-mediated rejection.

NO: 22
Left ventricular assist devices are funded in the UK exclusively as a bridge to transplant (BTT). Ho
wever, patients who potentially could receive a transplant may develop reversible contraindications 
to transplant. Bridge to candidacy (BTC) has sometimes been controversial, given the uncertain clini
cal efficacy of BTC and the risk that reimbursement could be denied. We analysed the UK ventricular 
assist device database to understand how common BTC was and to assess patient survival rates and inc
idences of transplants. We identified BTC implants in patients with pulmonary hypertension, chronic 
kidney disease and obesity using the UK guidelines for heart transplants. A total of 306 of 540 pati
ents had complete data and 157 were identified as BTC (51%). Overall, there was no difference in sur
vival rates between patients designated as BTC and those designated at BTT (71.9 vs 72.9% at 1 year,
 respectively; P = 0.82). However, the survival rate was lower at all time points in those with an e
stimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) <40 and in patients with a body mass index (BMI) >32 up t
o 1-year postimplant. There were no significant differences in the incidence of transplant between p
atients who were BTC and BTT or for any subgroup up to 5 years. However, we noted a diverging trend 
towards a lower cumulative incidence of transplant for patients with a BMI >32. BTC is common in the
 UK and appears clinically effective, given that the survival rates and the incidence of transplants
 were comparable with those for BTT. Patients with a high BMI have a worse survival rate through to 
1 year and a trend for a lower incidence of a transplant. Patients with a low eGFR also have a worse
 survival rate, but a similar proportion received transplants.

NO: 23
Perioperative cardiac xenograft dysfunction (PCXD) was described by McGregor and colleagues as a maj
or barrier to the translation of heterotopic cardiac xenotransplantation into the orthotopic positio
n. It is characterized by graft dysfunction in the absence of rejection within 24 to 48 hours of tra
nsplantation. We describe our experience with PCXD at a single program. Orthotopic transplantation o
f genetically engineered pig hearts was performed in 6 healthy baboons. The immunosuppression regime
n included induction by anti-CD20 monoclonal antibodies (mAb), thymoglobulin, cobra venom factor, an
d anti-CD40 mAb, and maintenance with anti-CD40 mAb, mycophenolate mofetil, and tapering doses of st
eroids. Telemetry was used to assess graft function. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation was used to
 support 1 recipient. A full human clinical transplantation team was involved in these experiments a
nd the procedure was performed by skilled transplantation surgeons. A maximal survival of 40 hours w
as achieved in these experiments. The surgical procedures were uneventful, and all hearts were weane
d from cardiopulmonary bypass without issue. Support with inotropes and vasopressors was generally r
equired after separation from cardiopulmonary bypass. The cardiac xenografts performed well immediat
ely, but within the first several hours they required increasing support and ultimately resulted in 
arrest despite maximal interventions. All hearts were explanted immediately; histology showed no sig
ns of rejection. Despite excellent surgical technique, uneventful weaning from cardiopulmonary bypas
s, and adequate initial function, orthotopic cardiac xenografts slowly fail within 24 to 48 hours wi
thout evidence of rejection. Modification of preservation techniques and minimizing donor organ isch
emic time may be able to ameliorate PCXD.

NO: 24
Cardiac allografts from donors with a history of cocaine use (DHCU) are often discarded owing to con
cerns regarding organ quality. We investigated long-term outcomes of de novo adult heart transplanta
tion (HTx) using DHCU. Using the International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation Thoracic O
rgan Transplant Registry, we identified 24,430 adult recipients of primary, deceased donor, heart-al
one transplants between January 1, 2000, and June 30, 2013. Transplants were categorized on the basi
s of DHCU. Survival rates were compared using Kaplan-Meier curves and log-rank tests. A total of 3,2
46 (13.3%) HTx were performed using DHCU during the study period. Of these, 1,477 (45.5%) were class
ified as current users. Organs from DHCU were transplanted at a later sequence number (data from a s
ub-group of patients transplanted in the United States) than those from the non-cocaine use group (m
ean sequence number 16.1 ± 55.6 vs 11.5 ± 38.2; p < 0.001), suggesting higher decline rates by cente
rs. Kaplan-Meier estimates of survival were not different between groups (p = 0.16), with post-trans
plant survival rates at 1, 5, and 10 years of 88.1%, 75.8%, and 58.5%, respectively, in the non-coca
ine use group and 90.0%, 76.7%, and 59.7%, respectively, in the DHCU group. On multivariate analysis
, DHCU were not associated with mortality (hazard ratio [HR]: 0.94; 95% CI: 0.88-1.00; p = 0.050), c
ardiac allograft vasculopathy (HR: 1.02; 95% CI: 0.94-1.11; p = 0.56), or allograft rejection (HR: 0
.98; 95% CI: 0.92-1.05; p = 0.61). Our findings demonstrate that adult HTx performed using DHCU is n
ot associated with an adverse impact on long-term clinical outcomes. These findings should spur effo
rts to reduce discard rates of organs from DHCU.

NO: 25
Although several electrocardiographic features of arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (A
RVC) (also called dysplasia) have been described, total 12-lead QRS voltage is not one of them. This
 report describes total 12-lead QRS voltage in 11 patients with ARVC who underwent orthotopic heart 
transplantation (OHT) because of progressively severe heart failure. Additionally, it illustrates th
e varied morphologic features of ARVC. The total 12-lead nonpaced QRS voltages before OHT ranged fro
m 28 to 118 mm (mean 74 ± 32), and those in the paced tracings, from 33 to 129 mm (62 ± 32). The vol
tages are the lowest we have encountered among 12 previously reported cardiovascular conditions. The
 heart weights among the 11 ARVC patients ranged from 285 to 670 g (mean 448 ± 125). Very low 12-lea
d QRS voltage is characteristic of patients with ARVC with heart failure severe enough to warrant OH
T, and thus may serve as a clue to its diagnosis.

NO: 26
Cardiac allograft vasculopathy (CAV) remains a major impediment to long-term survival after heart tr
ansplantation (HT). We investigated the incidence, disease course, and risk factors for CAV. Among 3
99 patients who underwent HT between November 1992 and July 2014, 297 survivors were reviewed. Endpo
ints were CAV development and the composite outcome of death or re-HT. During 5.6±5.2 years, CAV was
 detected in 54 patients: 45 (83.3%), 8 (14.8%), and 1 (1.8%) patients for CAV 1, 2, and 3, respecti
vely. At 1, 5, and 10 years, 99.0%, 82.4%, and 60.3% of patients were free of CAV, respectively. Onl
y four patients (7.4%) showed progression over 4.8±2.1 years' follow-up. The presence of CAV did not
 affect the composite outcome (P=.89). Predictors of CAV included donor age (HR1.06, 95% CI: 1.03-1.
10: P<.001), recipient age (1.03 [1.003-1.06]; P=.03), ischemic time >240 minutes (3.15 [1.36-7.28],
 P=.007), postoperative renal replacement therapy (RRT) (7.1 [2.3-21.8]; P=.001), and triglyceride l
evel at 1 year post-HT (1.005 [1.002-1.008], P=.003). CAV incidence after HT appears acceptable, wit
h most cases being stationary and inconsequential for survival. Development of CAV seems to be influ
enced by donor and recipient age, ischemic time, postoperative RRT, and high triglyceride level.

NO: 27
The effect of the new donor heart allocation system on survival following bridging to transplantatio
n with venous-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation remains unknown. The new allocation syste
m places extracorporeal membrane oxygenation-supported candidates at the highest status. The United 
Network for Organ Sharing database was queried for adults bridged to single-organ heart transplantat
ion with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation from October 2006 to February 2020. Association between
 implementation of the new system and recipient survival was analyzed using Kaplan-Meier estimates, 
Cox proportional hazards models, and propensity score matching. Of 364 recipients included, 173 and 
191 were transplanted under new and old systems, respectively. Compared with the old system, waitlis
t time was halved under the new system (5 versus 10 days,  Recipients transplanted following extraco
rporeal membrane oxygenation bridging to transplantation under the new system achieve greater 180-da
y survival compared with the old and demonstrate less preoperative comorbidity. Waitlist outcomes ha
ve also improved significantly under the new allocation system.

NO: 28
Primary graft dysfunction (PGD) remains a significant cause of post-transplant morbidity and mortali
ty. The exact mechanism and risk factors for this phenomenon remain unknown in the contemporary era.
 In this study we reviewed adult patients undergoing heart transplantation (HT) at our institution b
etween 2009 and 2017. Severe PGD was defined as the need for mechanical circulatory support (MCS) wi
thin the first 24 hours after HT. Multivariate logistic regression analysis was used to identify ris
k factors for severe PGD, focusing on those bridged to transplant (BTT) with a continuous-flow left 
ventricular assist device (CF-LVAD). Fifty-six of 480 (11.7%) HT patients experienced severe PGD. Ei
ghty percent of the severe PGD patients were BTT with a CF-LVAD (odds ratio [OR] 3.86, 95% confidenc
e interval [CI] 1.94 to 7.68, p < 0.001). Among the BTT patients, significant associations between >
1 year of CF-LVAD support (OR 2.48, 95% CI 1.14 to 5.40, p = 0.022), pre-HT creatinine (OR 3.35, 95%
 CI 1.42 to 7.92, p = 0.006), elevated central venous pressure/pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (C
VP/PCWP) ratio (OR 3.32, 95% CI 1.04 to 10.60, p = 0.043), use of amiodarone before HT (OR 2.69, 95%
 CI 1.20 to 6.20, p = 0.022), and severe PGD were identified. RADIAL score did not accurately predic
t severe PGD in this contemporary cohort. Those patients who developed severe PGD had decreased 1-ye
ar post-transplant survival (78.3% vs 91.8%, p = 0.007). Use of CF-LVAD as BTT is associated with an
 increased risk of severe PGD. Increased time on device support, renal dysfunction, right ventricula
r dysfunction as assessed by CVP/PCWP ratio, and pre-transplant amiodarone may identify those patien
ts at high risk. Further research is warranted focusing on optimal timing of device implantation and
 transplantation, as well as the underlying mechanisms of PGD.

NO: 29
We report the case of a 3-year-old male who developed recurrent Clostridium difficile infection afte
r receiving an orthotopic heart transplant. Despite multiple courses of antibiotics, C. difficile in
fection was persistent and he underwent a fecal microbiota transplant. The patient responded with re
solution of his diarrhea. However, within 2 months he developed severe mixed rejection with high cir
culating donor-specific antibodies and significant coronary vasculopathy. Organ dysfunction led to t
he need for re-transplantation. The patient's postoperative course has since been complicated by pne
umatosis intestinalis and recurrent C. difficile infection.

NO: 30
Pediatric sHKTx remains uncommon in the US. We examined outcomes of pediatric sHKTx compared to PHTx
 alone. Our objective was to identify a threshold eGFR that justified pediatric sHKTx. Data from the
 SRTR heart and kidney databases were used to identify 9245 PHTx, and 63 pediatric sHKTx performed b
etween 1992 and 2017 (age ≤21 years). The median age for sHKTx was 16 years, and included 31 males (
31/63 = 49%). Over half of sHKTx (36/63 = 57%) were performed in cases where pretransplant dialysis 
was initiated. Among patients who required pretransplant dialysis, the risk of death in sHKTx recipi
ents was significantly lower than PHTx alone (sHKTx vs. PHTx: HR 0.4, 95% CI [0.2, 0.9], p = .01). I
n those without pretransplant dialysis, there was no improvement in survival between sHKTx and PHTx 
(p = .2). When stratified by eGFR, PHTx alone recipients had worse survival than sHKTx in the group 
with eGFR ≤35 ml/min/1.73 m Pediatric sHKTx should be considered in HTx candidates with kidney failu
re requiring dialysis or eGFR ≤35 ml/min/1.73 m

NO: 31
Heart transplantation is the definitive management for select patients with end-stage heart failure.
 Owing to an ongoing organ donor shortage, organs are sometimes allocated from distant locales. Thes
e organs may be perceived as less desirable because of donor risk factors and ischemic times. We com
pared survival after heart transplantation by donors originating from British Columbia (BC), other C
anadian provinces, and the United States. This retrospective cohort analysis included all patients t
ransplanted in BC between December 1, 1988, and October 21, 2014, and excluded those with missing da
ta or retransplantation. Among 382 patients, 297 (77.7%) recipients and 238 (62.3%) donors were male
. The median recipient age was 54.6 years (interquartile range, 46.0-61.0 years) and the median dono
r age was 33 years (interquartile range, 22-46 years). Overall 10-year survival was 62.1% (95% confi
dence interval, 56.3-67.4). There was no difference in 10-year survival when comparing donors from B
C, other Canadian provinces, and the United States despite significantly lower median ischemic times
 in donors from BC. Donor location was not predictive of mortality after controlling for recipient a
ge, donor age, and cold ischemic time. Donor origin did not impact 10-year survival after heart tran
splantation despite increased ischemic time, suggesting that distant donors result in similar outcom
es in BC.

NO: 32
Thymic function decreases progressively with age but may be boosted in certain circumstances. We que
stioned whether heart transplantation was such a situation and whether thymic function was related t
o the onset of rejection. Twenty-eight antithymocyte globulin-treated heart transplant recipients we
re included. Patients diagnosed for an antibody-mediated rejection on endomyocardial biopsy had a hi
gher proportion of circulating recent thymic emigrant CD4+ T cells and T cell receptor excision circ
le levels than other transplanted subjects. Thymus volume and density, assessed by computed tomograp
hy in a subset of patients, was also higher in patients experiencing antibody-mediated rejection. We
 demonstrate that thymic function is a major determinant of onset of antibody-mediated rejection and
 question whether thymectomy could be a prophylactic strategy to prevent alloimmune humoral response
s.

NO: 33
In donation after circulatory death heart transplantation, the donor heart is exposed to circulatory
 load. The right ventricle, due to its structure, has high compliance for volume load but is particu
larly vulnerable to increased pressure load. This study used a porcine model to conduct a functional
 assessment of the hemodynamics of the heart, with a focus on the right ventricle. Six pigs weighing
 24.6 ± 1.4 kg were used. Circulatory death was induced by asphyxiation after median sternotomy. Aft
er 30 minutes in the state of global warm ischemia, the ascending aorta was clamped, followed by a 2
0-minute reperfusion of the heart with a 20°C blood cardioplegia solution. Systemic circulation was 
established by cardiopulmonary bypass after aortic cross-clamping. After initial reperfusion, the bl
ood cardioplegia solution was replaced with blood. The blood was then rewarmed while the heart was s
till in a non-working state. Cardiac function was assessed twice in situ, first by the thermodilutio
n method, and then, by the pressure-volume measurement both at preischemia and at three hours after 
initiation of reperfusion. The recovery rate of cardiac output was 75%. End-systolic elastance (P = 
.02) and pulmonary arterial elastance significantly increased (P = .03), but the ratio of arterial e
lastance to end-systolic elastance was preserved (P = .91) in the right ventricle. Despite a decreas
e in cardiac output after reperfusion from warm ischemia, the right ventricle had a potential to res
pond the elevated afterload. It is important that donations after circulatory death heart transplant
ation should be performed with attention to avoiding right ventricular distension.

NO: 34
Background The impact of donor obesity on the outcome of orthotopic heart transplantation has not be
en studied. The aim of this study was to investigate the impact of donor obesity on the outcomes of 
adult orthotopic heart transplantation recipients. Methods and Results Data were obtained from the U
nited Network for Organ Sharing database. All adult (age ≥18 years) patients undergoing orthotopic h
eart transplantation from 2000 through 2016 were included (n=31 920). We stratified the cohort by do
nor body mass index ( BMI ); 13 015 patients (40.8%) received a heart from a normal-weight donor ( B
MI 18.5-24.9), 11 271 patients (35.3%) received a heart from an overweight donor ( BMI 25.0-29.9), 4
910 patients (15.4%) received a heart from an obese donor ( BMI 30.0-34.9), and 2724 patients (8.5%)
 received a heart from an extremely obese donor ( BMI ≥35). The cohort of obese donors was older, in
cluded a higher incidence of diabetes mellitus, and had a higher creatinine. Our data also showed th
at the recipients of obese donor grafts were older, had a higher BMI , creatinine, percentage of dia
betes mellitus, and longer total waiting period. There was no significant difference detected in the
 survival likelihood ( P=0.08) of patients based on a donor's BMI-based categorized cohort. There we
re no significant differences found in the overall survival probability among 4 groups in the adjust
ed survival analyses ( P=0.25). Conclusions This study demonstrated that patients receiving higher B
MI donor hearts might not be subjected to an increased risk of death, at least during the short term
 after transplant, compared with those using the normal-weight donors.

NO: 35
Management of the increasing number of sensitized heart transplant candidates has become a recurrent
 issue. Rather than using pretransplant desensitization therapies, we used a posttransplant prophyla
ctic strategy. Our aim was to describe outcomes in transplant recipients with preformed donor-specif
ic anti-HLA antibodies (pfDSA) managed with this strategy. A posttransplant protocol was applied to 
patients transplanted with pfDSA, consisting of perioperative management of DSA (polyvalent immunogl
obulins +/- perioperative plasmapheresis sessions, according to DSA level, as well as induction ther
apy) and systematic treatment of subsequent antibody-mediated rejection (AMR), even when subclinical
. We performed a retrospective analysis of this prospective protocol. The study included all consecu
tive first recipients of a noncombined heart transplant performed between 2009 and 2015 at our cente
r. The primary endpoint was all-cause mortality. Secondary endpoints included primary graft dysfunct
ion, early posttransplant bleeding, rejection, and cardiac allograft vasculopathy-free survival. A t
otal of 523 patients were studied, including 88 (17%) and 194 (37%) transplanted with DSA mean fluor
escence intensity (MFI) of 500 to 1000 and greater than 1000, respectively. The median follow-up per
iod was 4.06 years. Survival was not significantly different between groups. Rejection-free survival
 was worse in patients with pfDSA MFI >1000, evidenced by a fourfold increase in the risk of antibod
y-mediated rejection. The incidence of primary graft dysfunction and cardiac allograft vasculopathy-
free survival did not significantly differ between groups. Perioperative plasmapheresis increased th
e risk for transfusion of packed red blood cells. This exclusively posttransplant prophylactic strat
egy achieved favorable outcomes in heart transplant recipients with pfDSA.

NO: 36
Long-term corticosteroid (CS) maintenance remains an effective option for immunosuppression followin
g heart transplantation. We used the International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation Regist
ry to examine characteristics and long-term survival among heart transplant recipients with differen
t duration of CS therapy. Primary adult heart recipients transplanted between 2000 and 2008 who surv
ived at least 5 years were categorized into three groups according to CS use: early withdrawal (≤2 y
ears) (EARLY D/C), late withdrawal (between 2 and 5 years) (LATE D/C), or long-term use (>5 years) (
LONG-TERM). Recipient and donor characteristics, post-transplant morbidities, and mortality were com
pared among groups. Kaplan-Meier was used to estimate survival up to 10 years post-transplant. The s
tudy cohort included 8161 recipients (2043 in EARLY D/C; 2031 in LATE D/C; and 4087 in LONG-TERM). L
ONG-TERM use of CS decreased over time, from 60% in 2000 to 43% in 2008, while EARLY D/C increased f
rom 19% to 33%, respectively. Survival at 10 years after transplant was lower among the LONG-TERM gr
oup (73% vs EARLY D/C 82% vs LATE D/C 80%; P < 0.0001). In this large multinational cohort, the prac
tice of long-term CS maintenance was associated with lower long-term survival compared with shorter 
CS use.

NO: 37
Heart transplantation results in complete denervation of the donor heart with loss of afferent and e
fferent nerve connections. The majority of patients remain completely denervated during the first 6-
12 months following transplantation. Evidence of reinnervation is usually found during the second ye
ar after transplantation and involve the myocardial muscle, sinoatrial node, and coronary vessels, b
ut remains incomplete and regionally limited many years post-transplant. Restoration of cardiac inne
rvation can improve exercise capacity as well as blood flow regulation in the coronary arteries, and
 hence improve quality of life. As yet, there is no evidence that the reinnervation process is assoc
iated with the occurrence of allograft-related events or survival.

NO: 38
Berlin Heart EXCOR Pediatric Ventricular Assist Device (BHE) (Berlin Heart AG, Berlin, Germany, BHE)
 is used worldwide for mechanical circulatory support as a bridge to transplantation or recovery for
 children with end-stage heart failure. The study aim was to evaluate morbidity and mortality of chi
ldren less than one year old supported with BHE to identify predictors of adverse outcomes. Data of 
all children aged less than one year supported with BHE between 2005 and 2018 at the Royal Children'
s Hospital, Melbourne were reviewed. Adverse events were defined using PediMACS criteria. Fourteen (
14) children under 1 year of age were implanted with BHE at a median age and weight of 0.37 years (I
QR 0.09-0.7) and 5.7 kg (IQR 3.5-7.95) respectively. Four (4) patients were neonates, and 10 were ol
der infants. Twelve (12) patients had cardiomyopathy and two, myocarditis. Preoperative extracorpore
al membrane oxygenation (ECMO) support was required in six patients for a mean of 9 days (IQR 6-13).
 Sepsis occurred in five patients (36%) and thromboembolic stroke in two patients (14%). Survival to
 bridge to transplantation (11) and recovery (1) was achieved in 12 patients (86%). Mortality was 14
%. The median duration of BHE support was 110 days (IQR 40-161). Both patients who died were neonate
s with myocarditis and required surgical re-intervention during BHE support. BHE provides excellent 
support as a bridge to transplantation or recovery in infants, with a low incidence of neurological 
dysfunction. Neonates with myocarditis may be at greater risk for death after BHE implantation.

NO: 39
Cardiomyopathy is a common complication among muscular dystrophy (MD) patients and often results in 
advanced heart failure and premature death. In spite of this, there is hesitancy to consider heart t
ransplantation (HTx). This study describes the HTx outcomes in patients with MD in the United States
. All HTx in the United Network for Organ Sharing database from October 1, 1987, to March 31, 2016, 
were identified. Two patient groups were created: MD cohort (n=81), and a cohort of all other cardio
myopathies, called cardiomyopathy-unmatched (n=41 317). Propensity score matching (ratio 1:2) was pe
rformed on transplant age, gender transplant year, renal function, and inotropic support at transpla
nt to form a cardiomyopathy-matched cohort (n=162). Patient characteristics and posttransplant outco
mes were compared. In the 81 patients with MD, Becker was the most common type (42%-52%). All the an
alyzed preoperative characteristics did not statistically differ between the MD and cardiomyopathy-m
atched cohorts except ventricular assist device use (16% versus 30%;  Patients with MD undergoing HT
x had similar long-term posttransplant survival compared with matched cardiomyopathy-related HTx rec
ipients. HTx appears to be an effective treatment for a select group of muscular dystrophy patients 
with end-stage heart failure.

NO: 40
Recipients of nonrenal organ transplants, including the heart, are at risk for developing acute kidn
ey injury (AKI). This situation significantly jeopardized the outcome of patients. The most effectiv
e treatment is continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) AIM: The goal of this project is to verif
y the prognostic value of preoperative serum creatinine concentration and glomerular filtration rate
 (GFR), calculated by the Modification of Diet in Renal Disease formula, to determine the risk of re
nal failure after grafting RESULTS: In the group of 39 patients, CRRT was needed in 7 patients (17.9
%; group K); 32 patients were in the control group (group C). The pretransplant creatinine level in 
group K was 133.7 ± 31.3 μmol/L and in group C was 160.8 ± 97.6 μmol/L; P = .47. We did not find a d
ifference between groups in GFR: group K 51 ± 6mL/min/1.73 m Developing AKI requiring CRRT after hea
rt transplantation prolonged the length of ICU stays. Preoperative creatinine concentration and glom
erular filtration rate do not predict AKI.

NO: 41
Recent reports demonstrated that patients with heart failure (HF) might have an increased risk to de
velop malignancies. This is also seen in patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD). Immunosuppressi
on in heart transplantation (HT) recipients additionally increases the risk of malignancies. The aim
 of this study was to determine the relation between HF duration and CKD pre-HT and the risk of mali
gnancy development post-HT. We included all adult HT recipients transplanted between January 2000 an
d November 2017 in our centre. Patients were excluded if they died or were retransplanted within 3 m
onths post-HT. Clinical characteristics were retrospectively collected. Sixty out of 250 patients (2
4%) developed a malignancy after a median of 66 months [interquartile range 33-108] post-HT. In mult
ivariable Cox regression analysis, HF duration was not a risk factor for all malignancies or solid o
rgan malignancies post-HT [hazard ratio (HR) 1.033 (0.974-1.096), P = 0.281 and HR 1.036 (0.958-1.12
0), P = 0.376, respectively]. Age [HR 1.051 (1.016-1.086), P = 0.004] and CKD pre-HT [HR 2.173 (1.23
6-3.822), P = 0.007] were independent risk factors for all malignancies. CKD pre-HT [HR 2.542 (1.142
-5.661), P = 0.022] increased the risk for solid organ malignancies. Exclusion of patients with dura
ble mechanical circulatory support in the analysis did not alter the significance of these risk fact
ors. Duration of HF pre-HT was not associated with malignancy risk post-HT. CKD was an independent r
isk factor for malignancies post-HT. More studies are needed to investigate this association.

NO: 42
A four- and a half-month-old girl with severe dilated cardiomyopathy due to neonatal enterovirus myo
carditis, treated with diuretics and milrinone for the past 4 months, was infected with SARS-CoV-2. 
The disease course was characterised by high fever and gastrointestinal symptoms. Cardiac function, 
as measured by echocardiography, remained stable. The treatment focused on maintaining a normal hear
t rate and a stable fluid balance. In children with severe underlying cardiac disease, even a mild S
ARS-CoV-2 infection can require close monitoring and compound treatment.

NO: 43
This study aims to understand the complex factors affecting heart transplant survival and to determi
ne the importance of possible sex-specific risk factors. Heart transplant allocation is primarily fo
cused on preventing waitlist mortality. To prevent organ wastage, future allocation must balance ris
k of waitlist mortality with post-transplantation mortality. However, more information regarding ris
k factors after heart transplantation is needed. We included all adults (30,606) in the Scientific R
egistry of Transplant Recipients database who underwent isolated heart transplantation from January 
1, 2004, to July 1, 2018. Mortality (8,278 deaths) was verified with the complete Social Security De
ath Index with a median follow-up of 3.9 years. Temporal decomposition was used to identify phases o
f survival and phase-specific risk factors. The random survival forests method was used to determine
 importance of mortality risk factors and their interactions. We identified 3 phases of mortality ri
sk: early post-transplantation, constant, and late. Sex was not a significant risk factor. There wer
e several interactions predicting early mortality such as pretransplantation mechanical ventilation 
with presence of end-organ function (bilirubin, renal function) and interactions predicting later mo
rtality such as diabetes and older age (donor and recipient). More complex interactions predicting e
arly-, mid-, and late-mortality existed and were identified with machine learning (i.e., elevated bi
lirubin, mechanical ventilation, and dialysis). Post-heart transplant mortality risk is complex and 
dynamic, changing with time and events. Sex is not an important mortality risk factor. To prevent or
gan wastage, end-organ dysfunction should be resolved before transplantation as much as possible.

NO: 44
Veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation is a valuable therapeutic approach in patients wit
h severe heart failure due to different etiologies. Current prognosis with veno-arterial extracorpor
eal membrane oxygenation is unsatisfactory, and the risk stratification is still challenging. Theref
ore, we aimed to evaluate the predictive value of different baseline model for end-stage liver disea
se scores for survival in patients with veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. We conduc
ted an observational, retrospective study of consecutive veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxyge
nation-treated patients between January 2012 and August 2018. The four types of model for end-stage 
liver disease scores-model for end-stage liver disease, international normalized ratio-excluded mode
l for end-stage liver disease, modified model for end-stage liver disease, and model for end-stage l
iver disease with sodium-were calculated preoperatively. Veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxyge
nation was used based on the four clinical indications: primer graft failure after heart transplanta
tion, weaning failure from cardiopulmonary bypass, acute myocardial infarction with refractory cardi
ogenic shock, and bridge to transplantation or bridge to candidacy. The primary endpoint of the stud
y was overall mortality. The secondary endpoint was in-hospital mortality. We performed univariable 
and multivariable Cox regression analyses. Data from 135 patients were analyzed. The median follow-u
p was 952 days (interquartile range = 417-1555 days). In-hospital mortality was 62.2%, and overall m
ortality was 71.1%. The multivariable Cox regression analysis is adjusted for indication, and the su
rvival after veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation score showed that the following score
s were associated with overall mortality: model for end-stage liver disease (hazard ratio = 1.04; 95
% confidence interval = 1.01-1.07;  Model for end-stage liver disease, modified model for end-stage 
liver disease, and model for end-stage liver disease with sodium scores could be useful in the risk 
stratification of veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation treatment in varying clinical in
dications.

NO: 45
Left ventricular distention can be recognized during the use of venoarterial extracorporeal membrane
 oxygenation as a key complication. Left ventricular decompression may decrease pulmonary pressure, 
minimize ventricular distention, and allow myocardial recovery. We applied venoarterial extracorpore
al membrane oxygenation to 4 patients while on a wait list for cardiac transplant. Two patients with
 severe heart failure developed high end-diastolic pressures leading to left ventricular distention.
 We used atrial venting methods to decrease the pressure. Here, we discussed the strategies to manag
e ventricular distention by conservative, interventional, and surgical means.

NO: 46
Yogurt is a nutrient-rich food and the beneficial effects of yogurt on both health and immunomodulat
ory effects are well documented. In this pilot study, we investigated the effects of commercially pr
oduced yogurt R-1 on alloimmune responses in a murine cardiac transplantation model. The R-1 is prod
uced by Meiji Co., Ltd., and contains live and active lactic acid bacteria (lactobacillus bulgaricus
 OLL1073R-1) mainly. CBA (H2

NO: 47
To analyze an unusual case of widespread chorioretinopathy after cardiac transplantation for its pot
ential etiology and clinical significance. Clinical examinations included widefield and macular colo
r and fundus autofluorescence photography, spectral domain optical coherence tomography, fluorescein
 angiography and indocyanine green angiography, full-field electroretinography, and Goldmann visual 
fields. A 44-year-old Hispanic woman was referred to rule out retinitis pigmentosa. Medical history 
revealed cardiac transplantation 6 months previously for idiopathic cardiomyopathy. Visual acuity wa
s 20/20 in both eyes. The fundi showed widespread gray mottling and little pigmentation, but fundus 
autofluorescence revealed black speckling broadly across the fundus, and geographic retinal pigment 
epithelium loss in the nasal midperiphery of the left eye. Spectral domain optical coherence tomogra
phy showed normal inner retina, and surprising preservation of outer nuclear layer, but the ellipsoi
d zone line was fragmented, and the interdigitation zone line was replaced with irregular debris. Re
tinal pigment epithelium was very thin with occasional excrescences. Electroretinography showed mild
 loss of both rods and cones, with mild flicker peak delay only in the left eye. Fluorescein angiogr
aphy showed no leakage, but a reticular pigment pattern in the macula. Indocyanine green angiography
 showed irregular arteriolar remodeling, and few large arteries. Serous retinopathy is well known af
ter organ transplantations, but this patient had retinal pigment epithelium and retinal damage well 
into the periphery and no leakage. Retinal dystrophy was deemed unlikely given the relatively good e
lectroretinography. The indocyanine green vascular changes raise the possibility of a transient chor
oidal ischemic event during or shortly after cardiac surgery. The event altered retinal pigment epit
helium diffusely, but allowed for enough regeneration to sustain retinal function. Diffuse transplan
t chorioretinopathy may be discovered if postcardiac transplant patients get peripheral retinal exam
inations.

NO: 48
The number of heart and lung transplantations has risen over the years, and they remain the mainstay
 of treatment for end-stage heart failure and end-stage lung diseases. From the assessment of the do
nor's heart to intraoperative management during separation from cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) to the 
postoperative follow-up of heart transplant patients, echocardiography plays a vital role throughout
 this process. Patients with chronic lung diseases also may have cardiovascular compromise secondary
 to pulmonary hypertension, pre-existing coronary artery disease, or valvular heart disease. Preoper
ative echocardiographic assessment allows for optimization before major surgery. An intraoperative t
ransesophageal echocardiography (TOE) for continuous monitoring of the cardiac function is important
 especially in a procedure where hemodynamic instability is often encountered. Postoperative complic
ations are common, and they can be diagnosed with the help of TOE. The authors aim to conduct a narr
ative review on the use of TOE mainly in the intraoperative setting during heart and lung transplant
ation and also to highlight some of its uses preoperatively as well as in the immediate postoperativ
e period.

NO: 49
Right heart hemodynamic management is critical, because many post-heart transplantation (HTx) compli
cations are related to right ventricular (RV) failure. However, current guidelines on size and sex m
atching rely primarily on weight matching, with recent literature using total ventricular mass (TVM)
, which places less emphasis on the impact of RV mass (RVM) matching. The aim of the present study w
as to analyze the relationship of RVM matching and survival after HTx. We performed the retrospectiv
e analysis using the UNOS database of adult HTx performed between January 1997 and December 2017. Pr
eviously validated equations were used to calculate TVM and RVM. The percent difference in ventricul
ar mass in the donor and recipient pair was used for the size mismatch. All donor-recipient pairs we
re divided into 4 RVM groups by their mismatch ratio. We analyzed RVM matching and explored how RVM 
undersizing impacted outcomes. The primary outcome measure was 1-year survival; secondary outcomes m
easured included stroke and dialysis within 1 year and functional status. A total of 38,740 donor-re
cipient pairs were included in our study. The 4 RVM match groupings were as follows: <0%, 0% to 20%,
 20% to 40%, and >40%. Utilization of donors who were older and of female sex resulted in greater RV
M undersizing. Survival analysis demonstrated patients with RVM undersizing had worse 1-year surviva
l (P < .001). RVM undersizing was an independent predictor of higher 1-year mortality (hazard ratio,
 1.23; 95% confidence interval, 1.11 to 1.34; P < .001). RVM undersizing was also associated with hi
gher rates of dialysis within 1-year of transplantation and poorer postoperative functional status. 
RVM undersizing is an independent predictor for worse 1-year survival. Donors who are older and fema
le have lower absolute predicted RVM and may be predisposed to RVM undersizing. RVM-undersized trans
plantation requires careful risk/benefit considerations.

NO: 50
Combined heart-liver transplantation (CHLT) has resulted in acceptable survival rates compared to or
thotopic liver transplantation (OLT) alone and orthotopic heart transplantation alone. Using the US 
transplant registry, we compared outcomes following sequential and combined HLT. We conducted a retr
ospective cohort study. De-identified data were obtained from the United Network Organ Sharing Regis
try. The primary outcome was patient survival from the date of OLT. Secondary outcomes included live
r allograft survival and heart allograft survival. The study cohort included 301 CHLT recipients and
 six sequential heart-liver transplantation (SHLT) recipients. Patient survival after CHLT was 88% a
t 1 year, 84% at 3 years, and 82% at 5 years compared to 83%, 67%, and 50% in the SHLT group (p = 0.
010). Liver allograft survival at 1, 3, and 5 years was 88%,83% and 82%, respectively, in the CHLT g
roup compared to 83% and 67%, and 50%, respectively, in the SHLT group (p = 0.009). After OLT, heart
 allograft survival at 1, 3, and 5 years was 86%, 79%, and 74% in the CHLT group, respectively, comp
ared to 83%, 67%, and 50% in the SHLT group (p = 0.037). Despite the limited size of the SHLT cohort
, we found that CHLT was superior to SHLT in survival rate and graft survival. The better outcomes n
oted in CHLT may relate to immunoprotection provided by liver transplantation from the same donor.

NO: 51
This study aimed to quantify the impact of donor variables on post-heart transplantation mortality a
nd morbidity in recipients with and without a pretransplant left ventricular assist device (LVAD). T
his is a prospective cohort study of the ISHLT Transplant Registry that includes all primary heart t
ransplants in adult recipients (January 2005-June 2013, n = 15 532). All recipients were divided int
o patients with a durable continuous-flow LVAD (LVAD recipient, n = 3315) and without mechanical sup
port (standard recipient, n = 12 217). Donors were classified as high risk (n = 3751) and low risk (
n = 11 781). Transplants were categorized into low-risk donor/standard recipient (n = 9214), high-ri
sk donor/standard recipient (n = 3003), low-risk donor/LVAD recipient (n = 2567) and high-risk donor
/LVAD recipient (n = 748). Outcomes prior to discharge, survival at 5 years and freedom from complic
ations were computed for each group. LVAD recipients experienced more episodes of infection, stroke 
and acute rejection with both low- (P < 0.001, P < 0.001, P < 0.001) and high-risk donors (P < 0.001
, P = 0.008, P = 0.028) prior to transplant discharge. Within standard recipients, a higher rate of 
primary graft failure (P = 0.035), infection (P = 0.001), dialysis (P = 0.012), acute rejection (P =
 0.037) and less freedom from cardiac allograft vasculopathy (P < 0.001) and malignancy (P = 0.004) 
was observed with high-risk donors. Within LVAD recipients, no differences in complications prior to
 discharge or long-term morbidity were detected between low- and high-risk donors. When compared to 
standard recipient/low-risk donors, all the 3 remaining categories had an increased probability of d
eath or graft failure within 90 days: LVAD recipient/low-risk donor [hazard ratio (HR) 1.26, confide
nce interval (CI) 1.05-1.51; P = 0.012], standard recipient/high-risk donor (HR 1.47, CI 1.27-1.71; 
P < 0.001) and LVAD recipient/high-risk donor (HR 1.72, CI 1.32-2.24; P < 0.001). Between 90 days an
d 5 years, only standard recipient/high-risk donor had an increased probability of death or graft fa
ilure (HR 1.140, CI 1.020-1.274; P = 0.021) when compared to standard recipient/low-risk donor. LVAD
 recipients, whether with high- or low-risk donors, have worse early (but not late) survival and mor
e early complications than those of standard recipients. We found that adverse donor characteristics
 are less predictive for determining the outcome of LVAD-bridged recipients than standard recipients
.

NO: 52
Up to 50% of heart transplant candidates require bridging with left ventricular assist devices (VAD)
. This study describes hospital activity and cost 1 year preceding and 1 year following VAD implant 
(pre-VAD) and for the year before transplant (pre-HTX). The sample comprises an Australian cohort an
d is the first study to investigate costs using both institutional and linked administrative data. I
nstitutional activity was established for 77 consecutive patients actively listed for transplant bet
ween 2009 and 2012. Costs were sourced from the institution or Australian refined diagnosis groups (
arDRGs) and the National Efficient Price for admissions to other public and private institutions. Da
ta from 25/77 VAD recipients were analysed and compared with data from 52/77 pre-transplant patients
. Total and per day at risk costs were assessed, as well as totals per resource. Fifty per cent (50%
) of the hospital costs in the pre-VAD year occurred during admission of VAD implant. Sixty-four per
 cent (64%) of costs in the pre-HTX and 38% in the pre-VAD period occurred outside the implanting ce
ntre. Costs in the year prior to VAD, $97,565 (IQR $86,907-$153,916), were significantly higher than
 costs accrued in the year prior to transplant, $40,250 ($13,493-$81,260), p < 0.0001. Once discharg
ed, costs per day at risk for post-VAD patients approximated those from the pre-admission period, p 
= 0.16 and in the more clinically stable pre-HTX cohort, p = 0.08. Compared with the year prior, VAD
 implant stabilised hospital cost in patients discharged home. A high proportion of the hospital cos
ts in the pre-implant year occur outside the implanting centre and should be considered in economic 
models assessing the impact of VAD implant.

NO: 53
As the population becomes increasingly obese, so does the pool of potential organ donors. We sought 
to investigate the impact of donors with body mass index ≥40 (severe obesity) on heart transplant ou
tcomes. Single-organ first-time adult heart transplants from 2003 to 2017 were evaluated from the Un
ited Network for Organ Sharing database and stratified by donor severe obesity status (body mass ind
ex ≥40). Demographics were compared, and univariate and risk-adjusted analyses evaluated the relatio
nship between severe obesity and short-term outcomes and long-term mortality. Further analysis evalu
ated the prevalence of severe obesity within the pool of organ donation candidates. A total of 26 53
2 transplants were evaluated, of which 939 (3.5%) had donors with body mass index ≥40, with prevalen
ce increasing over time (2.2% in 2003, 5.3% in 2017). Severely obese donors more likely had diabetes
 mellitus (10.4% versus 3.1%,  Donor severe obesity was not associated with adverse post-transplant 
outcomes. Increased evaluation of hearts from obese donors, even those with body mass index ≥40, has
 the potential to expand the critically low donor pool.

NO: 54
Simultaneous heart-kidney transplant (sHK) has enabled the successful transplantation of patients wi
th end-stage heart disease and concomitant kidney disease, with non-inferior outcomes to heart trans
plant (HT) alone. The decision for sHK is challenged by difficulties in differentiating those patien
ts with a significant component of reversible kidney injury due to cardiorenal syndrome who may reco
ver kidney function after HT, from those with intrinsic advanced kidney disease who would benefit mo
st from sHK. A consensus conference on sHK took place on June 1, 2019 in Boston, Massachusetts. The 
conference represented a collaborative effort by experts in cardiothoracic and kidney transplantatio
n from centers across the United States to explore the development of guidelines for the interdiscip
linary criteria for kidney transplantation in the sHK candidate, to evaluate the current allocation 
of kidneys to follow the heart for sHK, and to recommend standardized care for the management of sHK
 recipients. The conference served as a forum to unify criteria between the different specialties an
d to forge a pathway for patients who may need dual organ transplantation. Due to the continuing sho
rtage of available donor organs, ethical problems related to multi-organ transplantation were also d
ebated. The findings and consensus statements are presented.

NO: 55
For patients with advanced heart failure, left ventricular assist device (LVAD) can serve as a bridg
e to heart transplantation. Patients with class II obesity are eligible for implantation of LVAD but
 do not meet criteria for cardiac transplant listing. Laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy (LSG) is propo
sed as weight losing modality in order to reach the New York Heart Association (NYHA) criteria for l
isting. In our center, three patients on LVAD with need for weight-reducing therapy were treated wit
h laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy. We reviewed our data retrospectively and compared it with the lit
erature. Successful weight loss was achieved in all patients, without postoperative adverse events. 
Two out of three were listed on transplant waiting list. Our results are similar to those described 
in other series.

NO: 56
Our transplant center recently expanded the acceptance criteria for cardiac donors to increase heart
 transplant volume. Our purpose was to assess the success of this strategy while maintaining accepta
ble 1-year survival. We retrospectively reviewed patients who underwent heart transplantation at our
 institution from January 2011 through December 2017. This time period was divided into 2 periods: 2
011 to 2014 (Period A) and 2015 to 2017 (Period B) because we implemented our new donor acceptance p
olicy at the onset of 2015. We compared recipient and donor characteristics from the 2 time periods.
 The primary outcomes were 1-year graft and patient survival. Transplant volume increased in Period 
B with the expanded donor acceptance policy: 128 heart transplants over 36 months compared to 52 tra
nsplants in 48 months in Period A. Mean (± SD) recipient age was significantly higher in Period B (5
4 ± 12 vs 50 ± 15 years; P = .04) whereas other recipient variables were similar. Donors in Period B
 were significantly older, more likely to be female, had larger body mass index, were located a grea
ter distance from the transplant center, and had a higher sequence number. Female donor to male reci
pient occurred more often in Period B than in Period A (27% vs 10%; P = .01). Both 1-year patient su
rvival and graft survival were unchanged between Period B (95% for both) and Period A (96% for both)
. Using a more aggressive donor acceptance policy allowed for an increase in heart transplant volume
 while maintaining acceptable 1-year graft and patient survival.

NO: 57
There is a limited supply of organs for all those who need them for survival. Thus, careful decision
s must be made about who is listed for transplant. Studies show that manifesting genetic disease can
 impact listing eligibility. What has not yet been studied is the impact genetic risks for future di
sease have on a patient's chance to be listed. Surveys were emailed to 163 pediatric liver, heart, a
nd kidney transplant programs across the United States to elicit views and experiences of key clinic
ians regarding each program's use of genetic risks (ie, predispositions, positive predictive testing
) in listing decisions. Response rate was 42%. Sixty-four percent of programs have required genetic 
testing for specific indications prior to listing decisions. Sixteen percent have required it withou
t specific indications, suggesting that genetic testing may be used to screen candidates. Six percen
t have chosen not to list patients with secondary findings or family histories of genetic conditions
. In hypothetical scenarios, programs consider cancer predispositions and adult-onset neurological c
onditions to be relative contraindications to listing (61%, 17%, and 8% depending on scenario), and 
some consider them absolute contraindications (5% and 3% depending on scenario). Only 3% of programs
 have formal policies for these scenarios, but all consult genetic specialists at least "sometimes" 
for results interpretation. Our study reveals that pediatric transplant programs are using future on
set genetic risks in listing decisions. As genetic testing is increasingly adopted into pediatric me
dicine, further study is needed to prevent possible inappropriate use of genetic information from im
pacting listing eligibility.

NO: 58
Arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (ACM) is an inheritable heart disease characterized by fibro-fatty rep
lacement of the myocardium. TTN missense variants were previously reported as a pathogenic factor fo
r ACM. TTN missense variants are commonly identified in ACM, but have limited effect on the phenotyp
e of ACM. We sequenced 15 ACM-related genes in 35 patients who had a heart transplantation and quant
ified myocardium, and fibrous and adipose tissue in blocks of the explanted heart. Clinical and path
ological characteristics were compared between patients with TTN variants and others. Pedigree analy
sis was performed in 3 families with TTN variants. TTN variants were detected in 11 patients (all mi
ssense, 9 heterozygous and 2 oligogenic form). The TTN truncating variant was absent in the cohort. 
Patients with TTN variants had late onset age of the disease (31 ±13 years vs 17 ±3 years, P = 0.049
) and age of heart transplantation (41 ±14 years vs 24 ±9 years, P = 0.027), larger left ventricle e
nd-diastolic diameter (62 ±10 mm vs 45 ±10 mm, P = 0.019), smaller right ventricular outflow tract (
34 ±14 mm vs 50 ±15 mm, P = 0.046), more myocardium (40.8% ±29.4% vs 13.8% ±11.0%, P = 0.017), and l
ess adipose tissue (43.0% ±30.9% vs 66.9% ±18.5%, P = 0.036) in right ventricle than those with desm
osomal variants. There was few difference between patients with TTN variants and those without varia
nts. Pedigrees showed none of the family members with TTN missense variants had a disease phenotype,
 indicating a very low penetrance. TTN missense variants was commonly identified in ACM patients in 
this cohort, but hardly played a primary role in ACM as causative variants.

NO: 59
The number of adult congenital heart disease (ACHD) patients requiring heart transplantation (HT) co
ntinues to grow, and if they survive the first year after transplant, their long-term survival is at
 least equivalent to non-ACHD patients. The 1-year survival of ACHD patients with HT remains lower t
han non-ACHD patients. We evaluated the affect of transplant center volume on 1-year survival of ACH
D patients. We analyzed United Network of Organ Sharing patients (age ≥18 years) who underwent their
 first orthotopic HT between January 1, 2000, and December 31, 2015, to assess the association betwe
en transplant center volume and 1-year survival of ACHD patients. We identified 827 ACHD patients at
 113 centers who underwent HT during the study period. The average age of the recipients and donors 
was 36 ± 13 years (60% men and 84% Caucasian) and 28 ± 11 (63% men and 66% Caucasian), respectively.
 Of the ACHD patients undergoing HT, 27% (n = 60) were done at low-volume centers, 30% (n = 10) were
 reported at high-volume centers, and the remaining (n = 43) were at medium-volume centers. A total 
of 96 patients died within 30 days, including 37 (16.7%) at low-volume, 37 (10.2%) at medium-volume,
 and 22 (9.0%) at high-volume centers (p = 0.019). The average unadjusted Kaplan-Meier 30-day surviv
al at low-volume centers was 83% ± 2%, which was significantly lower than medium-volume (90% ± 1%) a
nd high-volume (91% ± 2%) centers (log-rank p < 0.05). Within 1 year, 154 patients had died, includi
ng 56 (36.4%) at low-volume, 60 (38.9%) at medium-volume, and 38 (24.7%) at high-volume centers (p =
 0.011). Average unadjusted Kaplan-Meier 1-year survival at low-volume centers was 75% ± 3%, which w
as significantly lower than medium-volume (83% ± 2%) and high-volume (84% ± 2%) centers (log-rank p 
< 0.05). The 30-day and 1-year survival of ACHD patients undergoing HT is partly influenced by overa
ll transplant center volume and, potentially, volume of ACHD HTs, with low-volume centers performing
 poorly relative to medium-volume and high-volume centers. The role of peri-operative care and multi
disciplinary management in improving survival at low-volume centers required further investigations.


NO: 60
Severe acute kidney injury (AKI), defined as requiring renal replacement therapy (RRT), is associate
d with higher mortality postheart transplantation, but its long-term renal consequences are not know
n. Anonymized data of 3365 patients, who underwent heart transplantation between 1995 and 2017, were
 retrieved from the UK Transplant Registry. Multivariable binary logistic regression was performed t
o identify risk factors for severe AKI requiring RRT, Kaplan-Meier analysis to compare survival and 
renal function deterioration of the RRT and non-RRT groups, and multivariable Cox regression model t
o identify predicting factors of mortality and end-stage renal disease (ESRD). 26.0% of heart recipi
ents received RRT post-transplant. The RRT group has lower survival rates at all time points, especi
ally in the immediate post-transplant period. However, conditional on 3 months survival, older age, 
diabetes and coronary heart disease, but not post-transplant RRT, were the risk factors for long-ter
m survival. The predicting factors for ESRD were insulin-dependent diabetes, renal function at trans
plantation, eGFR decline in the first 3 months post-transplant, post-transplant severe AKI and trans
plantation era. Severe AKI requiring RRT post-transplant is associated with worse short-term surviva
l, but has no impact on long-term mortality. It also accelerates recipients' renal function deterior
ation in the long term.

NO: 61
Patients undergoing heart transplantation (HT) frequently receive perioperative red blood cell (RBC)
 transfusions, but the impact of perioperative transfusion on clinical outcomes after HT remains unc
lear. All adult HTs performed in Korea between 2007 and 2016 were analyzed using data from the Natio
nal Health Insurance Service. Patients were classified into four groups based on the number of RBC u
nits transfused during hospital admission for HT: 0, 1 to 2, 3 to 5, and greater than or equal to 6 
units. In-hospital and long-term mortality rates were compared among the groups. In total, 833 adult
s HTs were included in the study. The overall in-hospital mortality rate was 8.4% (70 of 833), with 
no mortality occurring in patients who received no transfusion. The in-hospital mortality rate was h
igher in patients requiring  greater than or equal to 6 units (25.1%) than in patients who received 
1 to 2 units (0.3%) and 3 to 5 units (2.7%; P < .001). Patients who received   greater than or equal
 to 6 units of RBCs had a significantly higher risk of all-cause mortality after HT compared to pati
ents who received no transfusion (hazard ratio [95% confidence interval], 5.99 [1.46-24.56]; P = .01
2). Long-term survival rate was also lower in patients who received transfusions of greater than or 
equal to 6 units of RBCs than in patients who received no transfusion (P < .001). Perioperative tran
sfusion of greater than or equal to 6 units of RBCs may be associated with an increased risk of in-h
ospital and long-term mortality after HT.

NO: 62
Despite small single-center reports demonstrating acceptable outcomes using donor hearts with left v
entricular dysfunction, 19% of potential donor hearts are currently unused exclusively because of le
ft ventricular dysfunction. We investigated modern long-term survival of transplanted donor hearts w
ith left ventricular dysfunction using a large, diverse cohort. Using the United Network for Organ S
haring database, we reviewed all adult heart transplants between January 2000 and March 2016. Baseli
ne and postoperative characteristics and Kaplan-Meier survival curves were compared. A covariates-ad
justed Cox regression model was developed to estimate post-transplant mortality. To address observed
 variation in patient profile across donor ejection fraction, a propensity score was built using Cox
 predictors as covariates in a generalized multiple linear regression model. All the variables in th
e original Cox model were included. For each recipient, a predicted donor ejection fraction was gene
rated and exported as a new balancing score that was used in a subsequent Cox model. Cubic spline an
alysis suggested that at most 3 and perhaps no ejection fraction categories were appropriate. Theref
ore, in 1 Cox model we added donor ejection fraction as a grouped variable (using the spline-directe
d categories) and in the other as a continuous variable. A total of 31,712 donor hearts were transpl
anted during the study period. A total of 742 donor hearts were excluded for no recorded left ventri
cular ejection fraction, and 20 donor hearts were excluded for left ventricular ejection fraction le
ss than 20%. Donor hearts with reduced left ventricular ejection fraction were from younger donors, 
more commonly male donors, and donors with lower body mass index than normal donor hearts. Recipient
s of donor hearts with reduced left ventricular ejection fraction were more likely to be on mechanic
al ventilation. Kaplan-Meier curves revealed no significant differences in recipient survival up to 
15 years of follow-up (P = .694 log-rank test). Cox regression analysis showed that after adjustment
 for propensity variation, transplant year, and region, ejection fraction had no statistically signi
ficant impact on mortality when analyzed as a categoric or continuous variable. Left ventricular eje
ction fraction at approximately 1 year after transplantation was normal for all groups. Carefully se
lected donor hearts with even markedly diminished left ventricular ejection fraction can be transpla
nted with long-term survival equivalent to normal donor hearts and therefore should not be excluded 
from consideration on the basis of depressed left ventricular ejection fraction alone. Functional re
covery of even the most impaired donor hearts in this study suggests that studies of left ventricula
r function in the setting of brain death should be interpreted cautiously.

NO: 63
This study aimed to evaluate the long-term prognostic value of serial assessment of coronary flow re
serve (CFR) by rubidium Rb 82 ( Cardiac allograft vasculopathy is a major determinant of late mortal
ity in HT recipients. The long-term prognostic value of serial CFR quantification by PET imaging in 
HT patients is unknown. A total of 89 patients with history of HT (71% men, 7.0 ± 5.7 years post-HT,
 age 57 ± 11 years) scheduled for dynamic rest and stress (dipyridamole)  Forty deaths occurred duri
ng the median follow-up time of 8.6 years. Low CFR at PET-1 was associated with a 2.77-fold increase
 in all-cause mortality (95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.34 to 5.74; p = 0.004). CFR decreased over 
time in patients with follow-up imaging (PET-1: 2.11 ± 0.74 vs. PET-2: 1.81 ± 0.61; p = 0.003). Twen
ty-five patients were reclassified based on PET-1 and PET-2 (high to low CFR: n = 18, low to high CF
R: n = 7). Overall survival was similar in patients reclassified from high to low as patients with l
ow to low CFR, whereas patients reclassified from low to high had similar survival as patients with 
high to high CFR. In multivariate Cox regression of patients with PET-2, higher baseline CFR (hazard
 ratio [HR] for a 0.73 unit (one SD) increase: 0.36, 95% CI: 0.16 to 0.82) and reduction in CFR from
 PET-1 to PET-2 (HR for a 0.79 unit (one SD) decrease: 1.50 to 7.84) were independent predictors of 
all-cause mortality. Serial assessment of CFR by 

NO: 64
Although frailty has been previously shown to negatively influence postoperative outcomes, frailty m
easurements remain undefined and underused for patients undergoing orthotopic heart transplantation 
(OHT). This study aims to derive and validate an OHT frailty screening tool. The United Network for 
Organ Sharing database was queried for adults undergoing OHT between 2000 and 2018. The total popula
tion was randomly divided into derivation (80%) and validation (20%) cohorts. The primary outcome wa
s mortality. Secondary outcomes included rates of major morbidities and hospital length of stay. Var
iables that were constructs within preexisting frailty tools and that were predictive of a composite
 frailty outcome within the derivation cohort were incorporated into a multivariable regression mode
l (exploratory, P < .2). Independent predictors of frailty were included in the OHT frailty screenin
g tool. A total of 36,790 OHT recipients met the criteria for inclusion. Twelve variables were ident
ified as independent predictors of frailty and included as OHT frailty screening tool constructs. Re
cipients in the validation cohort were stratified as nonfrail (72.9%, n = 5363), prefrail (24.4%, n 
= 1795), and frail (2.7%, n = 200). Frail patients had significantly higher rates of posttransplant 
stroke, renal failure, and mortality at all time intervals as well as longer length of stay (all P <
 .001). The risk model's predictive rates of mortality strongly correlated with the observed rates o
f mortality (r The OHT frailty screening tool is highly predictive of adverse posttransplant outcome
s. This screening tool may provide a framework to enhance existing risk stratification tools and imp
rove overall resource utilization.

NO: 65
Orthotopic heart transplantation (OHT) remains the gold standard for advanced heart failure. Increas
ed risk (IR) donors were categorized by the United Network for Organ Sharing Database (UNOS) accordi
ng to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) criteria. However, the impact of CDC IR d
onor hearts on the outcome of adult OHT recipients remains unclear. The aim of this study was to com
pare the outcome of adult OHT recipients between CDC IR and non-CDC IR donor grafts. Data were obtai
ned from the United Network for Organ Sharing Databas. All adult patients (age ≥18 years) undergoing
 OHT from 2004 through 2016 were included (n = 24,751). Propensity scores for CDC IR donors were cal
culated by estimating probabilities of CDC IR donor graft use using a nonparsimonious multivariable 
logistic regression model. Patients were matched 1:1 using a greedy matching algorithm based on the 
propensity score of each patient. The impact of CDC IR donors on the post-transplant outcomes, such 
as 30-day and overall mortalities, was investigated using Cox-proportional hazards. Overall survival
 probability analyses were performed. Of 24,751 primary heart transplants from 2004 to 2016 with 358
4 (14.5%) as IR donors, 6304 transplants were successfully matched (n = 3152 in CDC IR group and non
-IR group). There were no significant differences in baseline characteristics in recipients and dono
rs. In the Cox-proportional hazards model for matched subjects, the use of CDC IR grafts was not ass
ociated with 30-day (hazard ratio of IR group vs non-IR group 0.97; 95% confidence interval, 0.87-1.
08; P = .57) and overall mortalities (hazard ratio, 0.94; 95% confidence interval, 0.73-1.21; P = .6
2). Interestingly, post-transplant acute myocardial rejection episodes during hospital stays were fo
und more often in the CDC-IR group, compared with the non-CDC IR group (CDC IR, n = 358 [11.4%]; non
-CDC IR, n = 304 [9.6%] P = .03), whereas post-transplant pacemaker placements were performed less f
requently in the CDC IR group (CDC IR, n = 80 [2.6%]; non-CDC IR, n = 111 [3.5%] P = .020). Importan
tly, there was no significant difference in the overall survival probability between CDC IR and non-
IR groups in both unadjusted and adjusted survival analyses. CDC IR status does not have a significa
nt impact on adult OHT recipient survival probability. Increased use of CDC IR donor grafts can pote
ntially alleviate the persistent and worsening shortage of available donor organs and shorten the wa
itlist time for heart transplantation.

NO: 66
Plastic bronchitis is a rare post-Fontan complication with limited treatment options. Heart transpla
ntation has evolved as a potential curative option, but outcomes have not been well-defined. This st
udy aims to assess contemporary waitlist and post-transplant outcomes in patients with plastic bronc
hitis. All Fontan patients were identified in the PHTS database (2010 - 2018). Waitlist and post-tra
nsplant outcomes were compared between Fontan patients with and without plastic bronchitis. Competin
g outcomes and Kaplan-Meier analyses were used to assess the impact of plastic bronchitis on waitlis
t and post-transplant survival. A secondary analysis excluded those with PLE from the comparison coh
ort. Of 645 Fontan patients listed for heart transplant, 69 (11%) had plastic bronchitis. At listing
, patients with plastic bronchitis were younger (8.9 vs 11.1 years, P = .02), but had few other diff
erences in baseline characteristics. A fewer Fontan patients with plastic bronchitis were listed in 
the more recent era (46 [15.4%] in 2010-2014 vs 23 [6.6%] in 2015-2018, P < .01). Overall, there was
 no difference in waitlist (P = .30) or post-transplant (P = .66) survival for Fontan patients with 
and without plastic bronchitis. The results were similar after excluding patients with PLE. Contrary
 to prior reports, this relatively large series showed that plastic bronchitis did not have a negati
ve impact on survival to or after heart transplantation in Fontan patients. Our study also found a 5
0% reduction in listing in the current era, which may indicate evolution in management of Fontan pat
ients.

NO: 67
It remains unclear whether left ventricular assist device (LVAD) implantation in non-inotrope depend
ent patients is of clinical benefit. This study sought to evaluate cause of death in patients listed
 for heart transplant (HT) to determine the relative risks and benefits of implanting LVAD into pati
ents who are less sick than those included in the original clinical trials. We examined death as the
 primary outcome in 23,098 patients listed for HT from 2006 to 2014 using proportional subdistributi
on hazards modeling. Cause of death was examined as a secondary outcome using χ 1859 (8.1%) patients
 were removed from the wait list for death, including 229 (2.7%) status 1A, 349 (4.6%) status 1B, 24
6 (13.2%) status 2, and 1035 (26.0%) status 7 patients (P < 0.0001). Status 2 patients who received 
LVAD while listed had a higher risk of death compared to those who did not (adjusted HR 1.68; 95% CI
 1.09-2.59; P = 0.02), while there was no increased risk of death in status 1A (HR 1.02; 95% CI 0.68
-1.51; P = 0.9) and status 1B (HR 0.89; 95% CI 0.65-1.23; P = 0.5) who received LVAD. Status 2 patie
nts who received LVAD were more likely to die cerebrovascular causes (0.6% vs. 0.1%, P = 0.009) and 
organ failure (70.6% vs. 29.4%, P = 0.003). LVAD implantation in status 2 patients listed for HT is 
associated with a higher risk of death. More research is needed to determine the impact LVAD implant
ation will have on mortality in patients with ambulatory, non-inotrope dependent HF.

NO: 68
Cardiogenic shock (CS) is associated with high mortality and often requires involvement of a multidi
sciplinary provider team to deliver timely care. Care coordination is more difficult on weekends, wh
ich may lead to a delay in care. We sought to assess the effect of weekend admissions on outcomes in
 patients admitted with CS. Patients admitted with CS were identified from 2005 to 2014 in the Natio
nal Inpatient Sample using ICD9 code 785.51. Baseline demographics, in-hospital procedures, and outc
omes were obtained and compared by day of admission. A multivariable model was used to assess the im
pact of weekend admission on in-hospital mortality. A total of 875,054 CS admissions were identified
 (age 67.4 ± 15.1 years, 40.2% female, 72.1% Caucasian), with 23% of patients being admitted on week
ends. Baseline co-morbidities were similar between groups. Weekend admissions were associated with h
igher in-hospital mortality (40.6% vs 37.5%) and cardiac arrest (20.3% vs 18.1%, p < 0.001 for both)
 consistently over the study period. Use of temporary and permanent mechanical support devices and h
eart transplantation were slightly less common for weekend admissions. In a multivariable model adju
sting for relevant confounders, weekend admission was associated with a 10% increased mortality in p
atients with CS. In conclusion, patients with CS admitted on weekends had higher in-hospital mortali
ty and were slightly less likely to receive mechanical support and advanced therapies compared with 
those admitted on weekdays. Future studies and health system initiatives should focus on rectifying 
these disparities with around-the-clock multidisciplinary coordinated care for CS.

NO: 69
Statins improve survival and reduce rejection and cardiac allograft vasculopathy after heart transpl
antation (HT). The impact of different statin intensities on clinical outcomes has never been assess
ed. We set out to determine the impact of statin exposure on cardiovascular outcomes after HT. We pe
rformed a retrospective study of 346 adult patients who underwent HT from 2006 to 2018. Statin inten
sity was determined longitudinally after HT based on American College of Cardiology/American Heart A
ssociation (ACC/AHA) guidelines. The primary outcome was the time to the first primary event defined
 as the composite of heart failure hospitalization, myocardial infarction, revascularization, and al
l-cause mortality. Secondary outcomes included time to significant rejection and time to moderate-se
vere cardiac allograft vasculopathy. Adverse events were evaluated for subjects on high-intensity st
atin therapy. A Cox proportional hazards model was used to evaluate the relationship between clinica
l variables, statin intensity, and outcomes. Most subjects were treated with low-intensity statin th
erapy although this declined from 89.9% of the population at 1month after HT to 42.8% at 5years afte
r HT. History of ischaemic cardiomyopathy, significant acute rejection, older donor age, and lesser 
statin intensity (p ≤ 0.001) were associated with reduced time to the primary outcome in a multivari
able Cox model. Greater intensity of statin therapy was most beneficial early after HT. There were n
o statin-related adverse events for the 14 subjects on high-intensity statin therapy. Greater statin
 intensity was associated with a reduction in adverse cardiovascular outcomes after HT.

NO: 70
With the advent of combined antiretroviral therapy (cART), growing evidence has shown human immunode
ficiency virus (HIV) may no longer be an absolute contraindication for solid organ transplantation. 
This study compares outcomes of heart transplantations between HIV-positive and HIV-negative recipie
nts using SRTR transplant registry data. Patient survival, overall graft survival and death-censored
 graft survival were compared between HIV-positive and HIV-negative recipients. Multivariate Cox reg
ression and Cox regression with a disease risk score (DRS) methodology were used to estimate the adj
usted hazard ratios among heart transplant recipients (HTRs). In total, 35 HTRs with HIV+ status wer
e identified. No significant differences were found in patient survival (88% vs 77%; P = 0.1493), ov
erall graft survival (85% vs 76%; P = 0.2758), and death-censored graft survival (91% vs 91%; P = 0.
9871) between HIV-positive and HIV-negative HTRs in 5-year follow-up. No significant differences wer
e found after adjusting for confounders. This study supports the use of heart transplant procedures 
in selected HIV-positive patients. This study suggests that HIV-positive status is not a contraindic
ation for life-saving heart transplant as there were no differences in graft, patient survival.

NO: 71
Medicaid insurance in Georgia provides limited reimbursement for heart transplant (HT) and left vent
ricular assist devices (LVAD). We examined whether insurance type affects eligibility for and surviv
al after receipt of HT or LVAD. We retrospectively identified patients evaluated for HT/LVAD from 20
12 to 2016. We used multivariable logistic and Cox proportional hazards regression to examine the as
sociation of insurance type on treatment eligibility and 1-year survival. Of 569 patients evaluated,
 282 (49.6%) had private, 222 (39.0%) had Medicare, and 65 (11.4%) had Medicaid insurance. Patients 
with Medicaid were younger, more likely to be Black, with fewer medical comorbidities. In adjusted m
odels, Medicare and Medicaid insurance predicted lower odds of eligibility for HT, but did not affec
t survival after HT. Among those ineligible for HT, Medicaid patients were less likely to receive de
stination therapy (DT) LVAD (adj OR 0.08, 95% CI 0.01-0.66; P = .02) and had increased risk of death
 (adj HR = 2.03, 95% CI 1.13-3.63; P = .01). Despite younger age and fewer comorbidities, patients w
ith Medicaid insurance are less likely to receive DT LVAD and have an increased risk of death once d
eemed ineligible for HT. Medicaid patients in Georgia need improved access to DT LVAD.

NO: 72
The initial classic Fontan utilising a direct right atrial appendage to pulmonary artery anastomosis
 led to numerous complications. Adults with such complications may benefit from conversion to a tota
l cavo-pulmonary connection, the current standard palliation for children with univentricular hearts
. A single institution, retrospective chart review was conducted for all Fontan conversion procedure
s performed from July, 1999 through January, 2017. Variables analysed included age, sex, reason for 
Fontan conversion, age at Fontan conversion, and early mortality or heart transplant within 1 year a
fter Fontan conversion. A total of 41 Fontan conversion patients were identified. Average age at Fon
tan conversion was 24.5 ± 9.2 years. Dominant left ventricular physiology was present in 37/41 (90.2
%) patients. Right-sided heart failure occurred in 39/41 (95.1%) patients and right atrial dilation 
was present in 33/41 (80.5%) patients. The most common causes for Fontan conversion included atrial 
arrhythmia in 37/41 (90.2%), NYHA class II HF or greater in 31/41 (75.6%), ventricular dysfunction i
n 23/41 (56.1%), and cirrhosis or fibrosis in 7/41 (17.1%) patients. Median post-surgical follow-up 
was 6.2 ± 4.9 years. Survival rates at 30 days, 1 year, and greater than 1-year post-Fontan conversi
on were 95.1, 92.7, and 87.8%, respectively. Two patients underwent heart transplant: the first with
in 1 year of Fontan conversion for heart failure and the second at 5.3 years for liver failure. Font
an conversion should be considered early when atrial arrhythmias become common rather than waiting f
or severe heart failure to ensue, and Fontan conversion can be accomplished with an acceptable risk 
profile.

NO: 73
Survival after heart transplantation is steadily improving but primary graft dysfunction (PGD) is st
ill a leading cause of death. Medical management seems useful in mild or moderate PGD, whereas extra
corporeal life support (ECLS) could be suggested for severe PGD refractory to conventional treatment
. Our aim is to present the results of ECLS for PGD after heart transplantation at a single-centre e
xperience. We performed an observational analysis of our local database. According to the Internatio
nal Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation classification, patients were divided into a left and
 biventricular failure (PGD-LV) or isolated right ventricular failure (PGD-RV) group. The primary en
d point was survival to hospital discharge. Between January 2010 and December 2016, 38 patients pres
ented with PGD (PGD-LV n = 22, 58%; PGD-RV n = 16, 42%) requiring ECLS support. The mean age was 50.
8 ± 12.4 years and 79% were males. Baseline characteristics were comparable between the 2 groups. PG
D-LV patients displayed a significantly higher mortality rate on ECLS support as opposed to PGD-RV p
atients (46% vs 13%, P = 0.033). The rate of complications during ECLS support was comparable betwee
n the 2 groups. Twenty-three (61%) patients were successfully weaned from ECLS (PGD-LV = 50% vs PGD-
RV = 75%, P = 0.111) after a mean support of 9.0 ± 6.4 days. Seventeen (45%) patients survived to ho
spital discharge (PGD-LV = 41% vs PGD-RV = 50%, P = 0.410). In case of severe PGD with various manif
estations of ventricular failure refractory to conventional treatment, ECLS can be considered as a f
easible option with satisfactory survival in this critically ill population.

NO: 74
US Pediatric Heart Allocation Policy was recently revised, deprioritizing candidates with cardiomyop
athy while maintaining status 1A eligibility for congenital heart disease (CHD) candidates on "high-
dose" inotropes. We compared waitlist characteristics and mortality around this change. Status 1A li
stings decreased (70% to 56%, P < .001) and CHD representation increased among status 1A listings (4
8% vs 64%, P < .001). Waitlist mortality overall (subdistribution hazard ratio [SHR] 0.96, P = .63) 
and among status 1A candidates (SHR 1.16, P = .14) were unchanged. CHD waitlist mortality trended be
tter (SHR 0.82, P = .06) but was unchanged for CHD candidates listed status 1A (SHR 0.92, P = .47). 
Status 1A listing exceptions increased 2- to 3-fold among hypertrophic and restrictive cardiomyopath
y candidates and 13.5-fold among dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) candidates. Hypertrophic (SHR 6.25, P 
= .004) and restrictive (SHR 3.87, P = .03) cardiomyopathy candidates without status 1A exception ha
d increased waitlist mortality, but those with DCM did not (SHR 1.26, P = .32). Ventricular assist d
evice (VAD) use increased only among DCM candidates ≥1 years old (26% vs 38%, P < .001). Current all
ocation policy has increased CHD status 1A representation but has not improved their waitlist mortal
ity. Excessive DCM status 1A listing exceptions and continued status 1A prioritization of children o
n stable VADs potentially diminish the intended benefits of policy revision.

NO: 75
The HeartMate 3 (HM3; Abbott Laboratories, Lake Forest, Ill) left ventricular assist device (LVAD) r
eceived its Conformité Européenne mark for Europe in October 2015 and is currently under investigati
on of the Food and Drug Administration to gain approval in the United States. Within this study, we 
present the first real-world experiences, 1-year outcomes, and adverse events of a single-center coh
ort treated with the HM3. We prospectively studied midterm results of 27 consecutive patients receiv
ing the HM3 at a single institution. After HM 3 implantation, survival, causes of death, and complic
ations were recorded for all patients. Follow up was 100% complete. Twenty-seven patients were enrol
led into the study. Within 1 year after HM3 implantation, 3 patients underwent heart transplantation
 and 3 patients died. Thirty-day survival was 88.9%, 6-month 85.2%, and 1-year survival 85.2%. No pu
mp thrombosis and no strokes were observed within the study group. One incident of gastrointestinal 
bleeding was observed (3.7%). Right heart failure was diagnosed in 1 patient after HM3 implantation 
(3.7%). No technical complications of the pump were documented. No pump exchanges were necessary. Th
e main complication was LVAD-related infection (22.2%). The novel LVAD HM3 has already shown excelle
nt Conformité Européenne mark trial results. Within this cohort, 1-year survival after HM3 implantat
ion was 85%. The HM3 showed excellent midterm results with 0% stroke and 0% pump thrombosis rates 1 
year after implantation.

NO: 76
In spite of renal graft shortage and increasing waiting times for transplant candidates, simultaneou
s heart and kidney transplantation (HKTx) is an increasingly performed procedure established for pat
ients with combined end-stage cardiac and renal failure. Although data on renal graft outcome in thi
s setting is limited, reports on reduced graft survival in comparison to solitary kidney transplanta
tion (KTx) have led to an ongoing discussion of adequate organ utilization. This retrospective study
 was conducted to evaluate prognostic factors and outcomes of 27 patients undergoing HKTx in compari
son to a matched cohort of 27 patients undergoing solitary KTx between September 1987 and October 20
19 in one of Europe's largest transplant centers. Median follow-up was 100.33 (0.46-362.09) months. 
Despite lower five-year kidney graft survival (62.6% versus 92.1%; 111.73 versus 183.08 months; p = 
0.189), graft function and patient survival (138.90 versus 192.71 months; p = 0.128) were not signif
icantly inferior after HKTx in general. However, in case of prior cardiac surgery requiring sternoto
my we observed significantly reduced early graft and patient survival (57.00 and 94.09 months, respe
ctively) when compared to patients undergoing solitary KTx (183.08 and 192.71 months; p < 0.001, res
pectively) or HKTx without prior cardiac surgery (203.22 and 203.22 months; p = 0.016 and p = 0.019,
 respectively), most probably explained by the significantly increased rate of primary nonfunction (
33.3%) and in-hospital mortality (25.0%). Our data demonstrates the increased rate of early kidney g
raft loss and thus significantly inferior graft survival in high-risk patients undergoing HKTx. Thus
, we advocate for a "kidney-after-heart" program in such patients to ensure responsible and reasonab
le utilization of scarce resources in times of ongoing organ shortage crisis.

NO: 77
Pediatric heart-lung transplantation (HLT) is rare, and no report has analyzed patient outcomes sinc
e time of listing. We analyzed pediatric HLTs to understand risk factors for waitlist and post-HLT m
ortality. All pediatric (<18 year old) HLT candidates were identified within the UNOS database (n = 
573) and grouped by age, era, and by diagnosis. Logistical regression and Cox proportional hazard mo
deling identified risk factors for 6-month WL and overall post-transplant mortality. 209/573 (37%) H
LT candidates were transplanted, 7% recovered, 42% died waiting, and 15% were removed for another/un
known reason. Diagnoses were primary pulmonary hypertension(n = 130), congenital heart disease(CHD) 
without Eisenmenger's syndrome (ES) (n = 65), CHD with ES (n = 73), and other (n = 305). Patients wi
th a diagnosis other than CHD with ES (OR: 7.55, P = .001), on IV inotropic support (OR: 2.79, P < .
001), and infants (OR: 2.20, P = .004) were associated with waitlist mortality. There has been a 56%
 reduction in HLTs across eras (Era 1:10.8/yr vs Era 2:4.7/yr). Risk factors for post-transplant mor
tality were ECMO (HR: 4.1, P = .016), and being infant (HR: 2.2, P = .04) or 1-11 years old (HR: 1.7
8, P = .015). ECMO patients have an 87% 2-year mortality rate with a median post-transplant survival
 of 64 days. Overall, post-transplant survival was unchanged (log-rank P = .067) between eras. Exclu
ding ECMO patients, in the recent era 29 non-infant patients with primary pulmonary hypertension had
 93% 1-year survival and 67% 5-year survival. Nearly 600 pediatric patients have been listed for HLT
 in UNOS, although numbers are decreasing in the current era. HLT for a patient on ECMO appears to b
e an ineffective strategy; however, in well-selected cohorts, HLT can provide considerable post-tran
splant survival.

NO: 78
Pharmacokinetic (PK) changes can affect antiretroviral (ARV) systemic exposure for critically ill pa
tients living with HIV (CI-PLWH). Studies to guide ARV adjustments in this population are limited. A
 PK analysis was conducted in a 44-year-old CI-PLWH who presented for a heart and lung transplant on
 veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA ECMO). Home ARV therapy (ART) of co-formulate
d abacavir/lamivudine/dolutegravir (ABC/3TC/DTG) was continued. ARV serum concentrations were obtain
ed during and after VA ECMO. Two blood levels were drawn at 1 h, for maximum serum concentration (C 
Area under the concentration-time curve (AUC ART adjustments would not be required for this patient.
 Additional studies are needed to assess effects of VA ECMO and crushed tube administration of ARVs 
in CI-PLWH.

NO: 79
Cardiac allograft vasculopathy (CAV) is a complex disease that remains a significant cause of morbid
ity and mortality after orthotopic heart transplantation (OHT). Originating as a result of inflammat
ory response, the development and progression of CAV is attributed to endothelial dysfunction, cellu
lar infiltration, and a wide-range of genetic and patient factors. The detection of CAV remains a di
agnostic challenge, as symptoms can be variable or absent. While coronary angiography remains the in
itial test of choice for the diagnosis and surveillance of CAV, intravascular imaging (either by ult
rasound or optical coherence tomography) and physiologic assessments are useful adjuncts in the card
iac catheterization laboratory. Positron emission tomography, computed tomographic, and magnetic res
onance imaging may have a role increasing the time interval between invasive screening tests for pro
gnosis. Medical management should include a statin, vasodilator, and tailored immunosuppressive regi
men that maximally decrease allograft rejection and CAV progression while causing minimal side effec
ts. Patients that are less responsive to pharmacotherapy should be considered for invasive managemen
t with percutaneous coronary intervention. Although surgical revascularization is a poor option, rep
eat OHT is the only definitive treatment option but given its morbidity should be reserved for a hig
hly selected patient population.

NO: 80
The development of de novo donor-specific HLA antibodies (dnDSA) after transplantation is associated
 with graft failure, mortality, and cost. There is no effective therapeutic intervention to prevent 
dnDSA or ameliorate associated injury. The aims of this study were to identify specific HLA factors 
associated with dnDSA development and to propose primary prevention strategies that could reduce the
 incidence of dnDSA without prohibitively limiting access to transplant. The investigation cohort in
cluded heart transplant recipients from 2008 to 2015 (n = 265). HLA typing was performed and HLA ant
ibody testing was undertaken before and after transplantation. HLAMatchmaker analysis was performed 
for persistent dnDSA to identify potentially more immunogenic eplet differences. Validation was perf
ormed in recipients of lung transplants from 2008 to 2013 (n = 433). The majority of recipients with
 dnDSA had antibodies to identical eplet positions on DQ2 and DQ7. A high-risk epitope mismatch (fou
nd in DQA1*05 +  DQB1*02/DQB1*03:01(7)) was associated with a 4.2- and 4.9-fold increased risk of dn
DSA in heart and lung recipients respectively. HLA electrostatic potential modeling provided a plaus
ible explanation for this observed immunogenicity. A theoretical allocation algorithm avoiding high-
risk epitope mismatches was generated and predicted to reduce dnDSA by up to 72% without additional 
testing, eplet analysis, or cost.

NO: 81
Rothia mucilaginosa, previously known as Stomatococcus mucilaginosus, is a Gram-positive coccus that
 is a part of the oropharyngeal and upper respiratory tract microbiota. Although this organism is be
lieved to be of low virulence, it is increasingly being recognized as an opportunistic pathogen most
ly affecting immunocompromised hosts. In this article, we describe a case of Rothia mucilaginosa bac
teremia in an immunocompromised heart transplant recipient with end-stage renal disease, who was get
ting maintenance hemodialysis via a tunneled catheter. To the best of our knowledge, no cases of Rot
hia mucilaginosa bacteremia have been reported previously in heart transplant patients.

NO: 82
Due to the shortage of donor pool, there has been a need for organs with prolonged cold ischemic tim
e. This study aims to evaluate the short-term results of different cold ischemic times in orthotopic
 heart transplantation based on a single-center experience in China. We retrospectively analyzed out
comes of the heart transplant patients from 1 January 2015 to 31 December 2017. The recipient popula
tion was divided into four groups. Group 1: cold ischemic time greater than 8 hours; group 2: the co
ld ischemic time between 6 and 8 hours; group 3: the cold ischemic time between 4 and 6 hours; and g
roup 4: cold ischemic time less than 4 hours. Efficacy indicators included after transplant survival
, infection rate, rejection rate, and complications. The four groups have similar donor and recipien
t baseline characteristics (P > .05). Cold ischemic time greater than 8 hours had more cardiopulmona
ry bypass (CPB) time (127.62 ± 50.23 minutes; P = .003), CPB-assist time (86.14 ± 36.74 minutes; P =
 .047), and higher intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) usage rate postoperatively (47.36%; P = .010). C
old ischemic time greater than 8 hours witnessed a relatively higher mortality rate compared with th
e other three groups (P = .115, P =  .078, and P =  .114) during the 2-year follow-up. Survival rate
s of 1 and 2 years for the four groups were 78.95%, 87.13%, 87.32%, and 87.50% and 68.42%, 85.14%, 8
5.92%, and 83.93%, respectively. Cold ischemic time less than 8 hours can be reasonably applied to e
xpand the heart transplantation donor pool. Cold ischemic time greater than 8 hours might result in 
longer CPB time, CPB-assist time, and higher IABP usage postoperatively. It might also affect the in
-hospital and 2-years survival rate.

NO: 83
Cardiac atrophy is the most common complication of prolonged application of the left ventricle (LV) 
assist device (LVAD) in patients with advanced heart failure (HF). Our aim was to evaluate the cours
e of unloading-induced cardiac atrophy in rats with failing hearts, and to examine if increased isov
olumic loading obtained by intraventricular implantation of an especially designed spring expander w
ould attenuate this process. Heterotopic abdominal heart transplantation (HT

NO: 84
Concerns remain regarding the use of direct thrombin inhibitors for cardiopulmonary bypass anticoagu
lation in pediatric patients with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia undergoing complex cardiac surger
y. We describe the safe and effective use of epoprostenol sodium as an alternative therapy before he
parin exposure for a pediatric patient with subacute heparin-induced thrombocytopenia and a ventricu
lar assist device undergoing heart transplant.

NO: 85
The first pediatric heart transplant died 5 hours after transplant and the case was published by Kan
trowitz. There is no report of the first successful case in the medical literature, nor indeed the o
utcome of children transplanted prior to 1982. However, we recently discovered that children from th
is period were entered retrospectively into the ISHLT Registry when it began and they form the basis
 of this report. A retrospective review of the ISHLT Thoracic Registry was undertaken for pediatric 
heart transplants prior to 1982. Demographic and descriptive data, and patient and graft survival we
re analyzed. Thirty children (24 male) had a median age of 13 years (IQR 12-16) at the time of prima
ry transplant. The underlying cardiac diagnosis was cardiomyopathy (18), congenital heart disease (7
), not reported (5). The median follow-up was 2.63 years (IQR 0.1-7.2). Twenty-two patients are know
n to have died, and eight underwent retransplantation. Median patient survival was 3.5 years. The fi
rst patient to survive for more than one year was transplanted in 1968 and survived 6 years. The def
inition of a successful transplant is debatable; however, the first child reported to the registry t
o survive beyond one year was transplanted in 1968. Survival for these early patients was considerab
ly less than the subsequent eras and retransplantation more common; however, the experience in manag
ing these children laid the foundation for the future.

NO: 86
Preoperative liver and renal dysfunction remain surgical risk factors for both postoperative morbidi
ty and mortality. The Model of End-Stage Liver Disease Excluding INR (international normalized ratio
), or MELD-XI, score calculation may help as a predictor in patients with advanced heart failure. We
 analyzed the impact of progressive elevated MELD-XI values among recipients of heart transplant at 
our institution. The data of a total of 425 consecutive adult patients who underwent heart transplan
tation, between January 2000 and August 2018, have been reviewed and divided into 3 cohorts accordin
g to preoperative MELD-XI calculations (MELD-XI < 11; MELD-XI 11-18; and MELD-XI > 18). Early and la
te outcomes have been analyzed. Patients with a MELD-XI score > 18 had a more critical clinical cond
ition preoperatively and had a higher risk of early mortality (hazard ratio [HR] 1.45 [1.11-1.67], P
 < .001). They showed high risk for postoperative dialysis (HR 2.8 [1.5-5.3], P < .001), rethoracoth
omy for bleeding (HR 2.1 [1.2-4.1], P = .001), prolonged time of mechanical ventilation, time of int
ensive care unit stay (HR 2.2 [1.3-3.8], P = .005), and graft failure requiring mechanical circulato
ry support (HR 1.9 [1.1-3.3], P = .003). After risk adjustment per MELD-XI cohort, ischemic dilated 
cardiomyopathy, redo operation, and cold ischemic time > 240 minutes resulted in being the strongest
 predictors of early mortality (P < .001). The 5-year and 10-year survival for MELD-XI > 18 cohort w
as 63% and 47% vs 72% and 59% in the control group (MELD-XI < 18) (log-rank, P < .001). Patients wit
h an elevated preoperative MELD-XI profile presented more comorbidities and significantly lower surv
ival. This suggests the MELD-XI score may provide further insight into appropriate recipient and eve
ntual donor selection. Renal insufficiency and congestive hepatopathy should be properly optimized b
efore heart transplantation.

NO: 87
This study was aimed to elucidate the immunoregulatory properties of human cardiac fibroblasts cultu
red under pro-inflammatory and hypoxic conditions. Human heart tissue for isolating cardiac cells is
 generally hard to obtain, particularly from all four chambers of the same heart. Since different pa
rts of the heart have different functions and therefore may have different immunoregulatory properti
es, ability to analyse cells from all chambers allows for a unique and comprehensive investigation. 
Cells were isolated from all four chambers of the heart from patients undergoing cardiac transplanta
tion surgery due to severe chronic heart failure (CHF) (n = 6). Cells isolated from one donor heart,
 were used for comparison with the experimental group. Primary cultured human cardiac fibroblasts we
re treated with Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) to induce an inflammatory response. Cells were also subject
ed to hypoxia. To determine immunoregulatory properties of the cells, cytokine and chemokine profile
s were determined using multiplex ELISA. RESULTS: On average, the fibroblasts population constituted
 approximately 90% of the expanded non-myocytes. Levels of cytokines and chemokines were markedly in
creased in human cardiac fibroblasts cultured under inflammatory conditions, with a similar response
 in fibroblasts from all compartments of the heart. Unexpectedly, hypoxia did not further augment cy
tokine and chemokine secretion. In conclusion, human cardiac fibroblasts are a robust source of pro-
inflammatory mediators in the failing heart, independent of hypoxia, and might play a critical role 
in inflammation associated with the pathogenesis of CHF.

NO: 88
Although bridge to lung transplantation (BTT) with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) is inc
reasingly performed, the impact of BTT and its duration on post-transplant outcomes are unclear. We 
retrospectively reviewed medical records of adult patients who underwent lung or heart-lung transpla
ntation in our institution between January 2008 and December 2018. Data were compared in patients wh
o did (n = 41; BTT) and did not (n = 36; non-BTT) require pre-transplant ECMO support. Data were als
o compared in patients who underwent short-term (<14 days; n = 21; ST-BTT) and long-term (≥14 days; 
n = 20; LT-BTT) BTTs. Among 77 patients included, 51 (66.2%) were male and median age was 53 years. 
The median bridging time in the BTT group was 13 days (interquartile range [IQR], 7-19 days). Althou
gh simplified acute physiologic score II was significantly higher in the BTT group (median, 35; IQR,
 31-49 in BTT group vs. median, 12; IQR, 7-19 in non-BTT group; p<0.001), 1-year (73.2% vs. 80.6%; p
 = 0.361) and 5-year (61.5% vs. 61.5%; p = 0.765) post-transplant survival rates were comparable in 
both groups. Comparison of ST- and LT-BTT subgroups showed that 1-year (90.5% vs. 55.0%; p = 0.009) 
and 5-year (73.0% vs. 48.1%; p = 0.030) post-transplant survival rates were significantly higher in 
ST-BTT group. In age and sex adjusted model, the LT-BTT was an independent risk factor for 1-year po
st-transplant mortality (hazard ratio, 3.019; 95% confidence interval, 1.119-8.146; p = 0.029), wher
eas the ST-BTT was not. Despite the severe illness, the BTT group showed favorable post-transplantat
ion outcomes, particularly those bridged for less than 14 days.

NO: 89
Owing to improved surgical results, there is a growing population of patients with repaired congenit
al heart disease (CHD) requiring heart transplantation. The objective of the study was to review our
 experience in these patients. A retrospective review of the outcomes of heart transplantation in pa
tients with CHD (n = 77) between 1988 and 2014 was performed. Outcomes of early (1988-1999) and late
 (2000-2014) eras were compared. In results, the mean age was 18 ± 14 years (range: 16 days-58 years
). Seventy (91%) patients underwent a mean of 2.6 ± 1.3 (range: 1-6) cardiac operations before trans
plantation, whereas 7 were primary transplants. Univentricular palliation had been performed in 44 (
57%) patients. Patients with CHD in the later era had longer mean cardiopulmonary bypass time (early
: 190 ± 70 minute vs late: 271 ± 115 minute; P < 0.001), ischemic times (early: 222 ± 98 minute vs l
ate: 275 ± 102 minute; P = 0.039), and more often required reconstruction of the great arteries at t
he time of transplantation (8% vs 28%; P = 0.036). In those with prior univentricular palliations, t
he ratio of ischemic to cardiopulmonary bypass time decreased in the later era (early: 1.41 ± 0.60 v
s late: 0.99 ± 0.37; P = 0.016), reflecting increased intraoperative complexity. Following transplan
tation, hospital mortality was 13% (10/77; 7 due to primary graft failure). There was no difference 
in inhospital mortality between the 2 eras (P = 0.52); however, patients in the later era more often
 required postoperative extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (early: 8%, 3/38 vs late: 28%, 11/39; P 
= 0.036). In patients with prior univentricular palliations, those in the late era were more likely 
to experience postoperative renal impairment (early: 1/21, 5% vs late: 9/23, 39%; P = 0.01). Patient
s with CHD had higher 30-day mortality (CHD: n = 8, 10% vs non-CHD: n = 17, 3.8%; P = 0.021), but si
milar survival at 10 years (67% ± 12% vs 70% ± 4.7%; P = 0.87) compared to those without CHD. In con
clusion, patients with CHD undergoing cardiac transplantation in the recent era were more complex. T
hey had a greater number of prior cardiac operations, and more often underwent complex vascular reco
nstructions and required more prolonged intraoperative preparation.

NO: 90
The study is a prospective clinical observation of patients after orthotopic heart transplantation i
n a large academic medical center in relation to COVID-19 morbidity. The study population was compri
sed of 552 patients. All patients were consulted and advised by telephone as regards the prophylaxis
 of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Hospital and outpatient follow-ups were limited to the minimum. Preventive
 modification of immunosuppression was not recommended in relation to the pandemic. Three patients w
ith multiple comorbidities (a woman aged 60, a man aged 59, and another man aged 83; 2.25 years, 5.5
 years, and 7.5 years after heart transplantation, respectively) and one patient with concomitant ar
terial hypertension (a woman aged 48, 5.5 years after heart transplantation) presented with a sympto
matic COVID-19 infection. Three of the patients were on tacrolimus immunosuppression, and both femal
e patients were additionally on therapy with mycophenolate mofetil, which was discontinued following
 the diagnosis of infection. One male patient received combined therapy of cyclosporine A and mycoph
enolate mofetil. The 60-year-old woman presented with gastrointestinal manifestations of the COVID-1
9 infection which were of moderate severity. The recovery was achieved. The 59-year-old man presente
d with myocardial infarction, exacerbated renal insufficiency that required hemodialysis and cardior
espiratory failure complicated by bacterial sepsis. As a result, the patient died. The 83-year-old m
ale patient reporting fever, myalgia, fatigue, cough and dyspnea was admitted to hospital and deceas
ed due to septic shock two days after admission. The 48-year old woman who presented with mild sympt
oms of the upper respiratory tract infection recovered after two weeks. Symptomatic treatment was us
ed in all the patients. Another male patient (aged 45 years, 8 years after orthotopic heart transpla
nt with no significant comorbidities) was an asymptomatic carrier of SARS-CoV-2 and remained under h
ospital care. Of 552 patients after orthotopic heart transplantation, two SARS-CoV-2-related deaths 
were reported.

NO: 91
Adult congenital heart disease (ACHD) patients are at risk for end-stage heart failure; heart transp
lantation (Htx) represents the only definitive therapy available although not easily achievable for 
all patients. The study aims to assess the pathway difficulties and outcomes of ACHD patients with e
nd-stage heart failure referred for Htx evaluation. This is a single center retrospective study on A
CHD patients with end-stage heart failure referred to Htx evaluation from 2004 to 2015. Demographic 
data, medical history, failure modality, and follow-up were obtained from patient charts. End-points
 were Htx list enrollment, transplant, and survival. Statistical analysis was performed comparing pa
tients listed and not listed. There were 21 ACHD patients with end-stage heart failure referred to H
tx evaluation. Transplant listing was declined for 12 (57%) meanwhile 9 patients were listed. Htx wa
s successfully achieved in 3 patients after 24 and 36 months, respectively. Three patients are still
 on the wait list and three died while waiting, with a listed group mortality of 33.3% (3/9). Mortal
ity occurred in first 18 months after Htx list enrollment. Not listed group mortality was 50% (6/12)
 and occurred after a median time of 17.5 months (IQR: 9-23 months). There was no difference in surv
ival (P = 0.574) between listed and not listed (89, 63, and 63% vs. 83, 56, and 47% at 12-24-48 mont
hs). Follow-up median duration was 27 months (IQR: 14-56 months). Heart transplant listing for ACHD 
patients with end-stage heart failure is hard to obtain. Almost 2/3 of the patients were declined. S
urvival for these patients is reduced severely either in waiting list for transplant or excluded ind
icating the potential need of mechanical circulatory support as bridge to transplant or as destinati
on therapy to improve survival likelihood.

NO: 92
Given the shortage of donor organs in pediatric heart transplantation (HTx), pretransplant risk stra
tification may assist in organ allocation and recipient optimization. We sought to construct a scori
ng system to preoperatively stratify a patient's risk of one-year mortality after HTx. The United Ne
twork for Organ Sharing database was queried for pediatric (<18 years) patients undergoing HTx betwe
en 2000 and 2016. The population was randomly divided in a 4:1 fashion into derivation and validatio
n cohorts. A multivariable logistic regression model for one-year mortality was constructed within t
he derivation cohort. Points were then assigned to independent predictors ( P < .05) based on relati
ve odds ratios (ORs). Risk groups were established based on easily applicable, whole-integer score c
utoffs. A total of 5,700 patients underwent HTx; one-year mortality was 10.7%. There was a similar d
istribution of variables between derivation (n = 4,560) and validation (n = 1,140) cohorts. Of the 1
2 covariates included in the final model, nine were allotted point values. The low-risk (score 0-9),
 intermediate-risk (10-20), and high-risk (>20) groups had a 5.18%, 10%, and 28% risk of one-year mo
rtality ( P < .001), respectively. Both intermediate-risk (OR = 2.46, 95% confidence interval [95% C
I]: 1.93-3.15; P < .001) and high-risk (OR = 9.24, 95% CI: 6.92-12.35; P < .001) scores were associa
ted with an increased risk of one-year mortality when compared to the low-risk group. The Children's
 Heart Assessment Tool for Transplantation score represents a pediatric-specific, recipient-based sy
stem to predict one-year mortality after HTx. Its use could assist providers in identification of pa
tients at highest risk of poor outcomes and may aid in pretransplant optimization of these children.


NO: 93
The new French heart allocation system is designed to minimize waitlist mortality and extend the don
or pool without a detrimental effect on posttransplant survival. This study was designed to construc
t a 1-year posttransplant graft-loss risk score incorporating recipient and donor characteristics. T
he study included all adult first single-organ recipients transplanted between 2010 and 2014 (N = 17
76). This population was randomly divided in a 2:1 ratio into derivation and validation cohorts. The
 association of variables with 1-year graft loss was determined with a mixed Cox model with center a
s random effect. The predictors were used to generate a transplant-risk score (TRS). Donor-recipient
 matching was assessed using 2 separate recipient- and donor-risk scores. Factors associated with 1-
year graft loss were recipient age >50 years, valvular cardiomyopathy and congenital heart disease, 
previous cardiac surgery, diabetes, mechanical ventilation, glomerular filtration rate and bilirubin
, donor age >55 years, and donor sex: female. The C-index of the final model was 0.70. Correlation b
etween observed and predicted graft loss rate was excellent for the overall cohort (r = 0.90). Heart
s from high-risk donors transplanted to low-risk recipients had similar survival as those from low-r
isk donors. The TRS provides an accurate prediction of 1-year graft-loss risk and allows optimal don
or-recipient matching.

NO: 94
This article describes a patient who presented with an ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction th
at quickly developed into acute cardiogenic shock refractory to conventional medical therapy. Extrac
orporeal membrane oxygenation was used to manage the patient's heart failure and bridge to a long-te
rm left ventricular assist device.

NO: 95
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation therapy is being used increasingly in different areas. It has be
come an indispensable assistant to clinicians for hypoxic pulmonary disorders, cardiogenic shock, re
suscitation, and during cardiac surgery. In this case report, we describe a patient who is bridged t
o successful cardiac retransplant under extracorporeal membrane oxygenation therapy support after ex
tracorporeal membrane oxygenation therapy-assisted cardiopulmonary resuscitation.

NO: 96
Operating room (OR) extubation has been reported after lung transplantation (LT) in small cohorts. T
his study aimed to evaluate the prognosis of OR-extubated patients. The secondary objectives were to
 evaluate the safety of this approach and to identify its predictive factors. This retrospective sin
gle-center cohort study included patients undergoing double lung transplantation (DLT) from January 
2012 to June 2019. Patients undergoing multiorgan transplantation, repeat transplantation, or cardio
pulmonary bypass during the study period were excluded. OR-extubated patients were compared with int
ensive care unit (ICU)-extubated patients. Among the 450 patients included in the analysis, 161 (35.
8%) were extubated in the OR, and 4 were reintubated within 24 hours. Predictive factors for OR extu
bation were chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)/emphysema (p = .002) and cystic fibrosis (p
 = .005), recipient body mass index (p = .048), and the PaO OR extubation was associated with a favo
rable prognosis after DLT, but the association should not be interpreted as causality. This fast-tra
ck protocol was made possible by a team committed to developing a comprehensive strategy to enhance 
recovery.

NO: 97
Although mortality has decreased considerably in pediatric heart transplantation, waitlist and post-
transplant death rates remain notable. End-of-life focused research in this population, however, is 
very limited. This Pediatric Heart Transplant Society study aimed to describe the circumstances surr
ounding death of pediatric heart transplant patients. A retrospective analysis of the multi-institut
ional, international, Pediatric Heart Transplant Society registry was conducted. Descriptive statist
ics and univariate analyses were performed to 1) describe end-of-life in pediatric pre- and post-hea
rt transplant patients and 2) examine associations between location of death and technological inter
ventions at end-of-life with demographic and disease factors. Of 9217 patients (0-18 years) enrolled
 in the registry between 1993 and 2018, 2804 (30%) deaths occurred; 1310 while awaiting heart transp
lant and 1494 post-heart transplant. The majority of waitlist deaths (89%) occurred in the hospital,
 primarily in ICU (74%) with most receiving mechanical ventilation (77%). Fewer post-transplant deat
hs occurred in the hospital (22%). Out-of-hospital death was associated with older patient age (p < 
.01). ICU deaths with high use of technological interventions at end-of-life were common, particular
ly in patients awaiting heart transplant. In this high mortality population, findings raise challeng
ing considerations for clinicians, families, and policy makers on how to balance quality of life ami
dst high risk for hospital-based death.

NO: 98
 The number of patients waiting for heart transplantation (HTx) is exceeding the number of actual tr
ansplants. Subsequently, waiting times are increasing. One possible solution may be an increased acc
eptance of organs after rescue allocation. These organs had been rejected by at least three consecut
ive transplant centers due to medical reasons.  Between October 2010 and July 2019, a total of 139 p
atients underwent HTx in our department. Seventy (50.4%) of the 139 patients were transplanted with 
high urgency (HU) status and regular allocation (HU group); the remaining received organs without HU
 listing after rescue allocation (elective group,   Donor parameters were comparable between the gro
ups. Thirty-day mortality was comparable between HU patients (11.4%) and rescue allocation (12.1%). 
Primary graft dysfunction with extracorporeal life support occurred in 26.9% of the elective group w
ith rescue allocated organs, which was not inferior to the regular allocated organs (HU group: 35.7%
). No significant differences were observed regarding the incidence of common perioperative complica
tions as well as morbidity and mortality during 1-year follow-up.  Our data support the use of heart
s after rescue allocation for elective transplantation of patients without HU status. We could show 
that patients with rescue allocated organs showed no significant disadvantages in the early perioper
ative morbidity and mortality as well at 1-year follow-up.

NO: 99
Fixed pulmonary hypertension (fPH) is a contraindication for heart transplantation (HTX). Left ventr
icular assist device (LVAD) implantation as a bridge to candidacy can reverse fPH in patients with t
erminal heart failure by chronic left ventricular unloading. We report our institutional experience 
with terminal heart failure patients and fPH that were successfully bridged to candidacy and underwe
nt subsequent HTX. We retrospectively reviewed the data of 79 patients with terminal heart failure a
nd fPH who were successfully bridged to candidacy for HTX with 6 different LVAD devices at our centr
e from October 1998 to September 2016 (Novacor n = 4, MicroMed DeBakey n = 29, DuraHeart n = 2, Hear
tMate II n = 14, HVAD n = 29 and MVAD n = 1). Median duration of LVAD support was 288 days (range 45
-2279 days). Within the same timeframe, a control group of 48 patients underwent HTX after bridge-to
-transplant LVAD therapy for reasons other than PH. Study end points were (i) development of fPH aft
er LVAD implantation, (ii) post-transplant outcomes and (iii) incidence of severe adverse events. Pu
lmonary vascular resistance, assessed by vasodynamic catheterization, was 4.3 ± 1.8 WU before LVAD i
mplantation. After a median support period of 89 days (interquartile range 4-156 days), pulmonary va
scular resistance decreased to 2.0 ± 0.9 WU (P ≤ 0.001), and patients were listed for HTX. Median du
ration of LVAD support in the study group was 288 days (45-2279 days). We observed 2 patients (2.5%)
 with acute right heart failure who required extracorporeal mechanical support after HTX in the stud
y group. Long-term post-transplant survival between the study group (3 years: 83.5%, 5 years: 81.0%)
 and the control group (3 years: 87.5%, 5 years: 85.4%) was comparable (log-rank: P = 0.585). LVAD i
mplantation as a bridge to candidacy reverses fPH in patients with terminal heart failure. Post-HTX 
survival is excellent and comparable to results obtained in patients without fPH at the time of HTX 
listing.

NO: 100
The official analysis of posttransplant survival considers only recently transplanted patients and s
uggests absence of outcome differences among pediatric heart transplant (HT) centers. We sought to c
ompare posttransplant survival among currently active pediatric HT centers in the United States over
 15 years of activity. We identified all children <18 years old who underwent their first HT during 
2000-2014 at US centers active during 2013-14. Recipients were followed until March 2016. A mixed-ef
fects survival model with center as a random effect was used to assess center differences in patient
 and graft survival. Center case-mix and standardized mortality ratio (SMR) for 90-day mortality wer
e assessed by applying an internally validated risk-model. Overall, 4271 children transplanted at 46
 centers were analyzed. There was a significant center effect on risk-adjusted patient (P = .01) and
 graft survival (P < .001). Adjusting for 90-day SMR or center-volume, but not for case-mix, was ass
ociated with a significant reduction in center effect on long-term survival. There was no center eff
ect on conditional survival in 90-day survivors. In conclusion, there are significant differences in
 posttransplant survival among pediatric HT centers in the United States. Centers with better short-
term performance (lower SMR for 90-day mortality) maintain their outcome advantage on follow-up and 
have superior longer-term outcomes.

